Today Aleksandra Khokhlova is remembered as the star actress in films directed by Lev Kuleshov in the 1920s and 1930s. Indeed, at the peak of her career she was at the epicenter of the Soviet avant-garde, an icon of the experimental acting that matched the style of revolutionary montage cinema. Looking back at his life, Kuleshov wrote: “Nearly all that I have done in film directing, in teaching, and in life is connected to her [Khokhlova] in terms of ideas and art practice” (1946, 162). Yet, Khokhlova was much more than Kuleshov’s wife and muse as in her own right she was a talented author, actress, and film director, an artist in formation long before she met Kuleshov.

Aleksandra Khokhlova in By the Law (1926). Private Collection.

Growing up in an affluent intellectual family, Aleksandra would have had many inspiring artistic encounters. Her maternal grandfather, the merchant Pavel Tretyakov, founder of the Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow, was a philanthropist and patron who purchased and exhibited masterpieces of Russian Romanticism, Realism, and Symbolism. Aleksandra’s parents’ St. Petersburg home was a prestigious art salon and significant painters, actors, and musicians were  family friends. Portraits of Aleksandra as a young girl were painted by such eminent artists as Valentin Serov and Filipp Maliavin. Aleksandra’s father, the doctor Sergei Botkin, an art connoisseur and collector, cultivated ties to the World of Arts circle–the creators of the Ballets Russes. Serge Diaghilev along with designer Leon Bakst, painter Alexandre Benois, and ballet dancers Tamara Karsavina and Vaslav Nijinsky appear in Botkin family photos (Botkina et al., 134-143, 155-159). In her memoirs, Aleksandra recalled the strange fascination of seeing those she knew from the intimate family circle on stage (Botkina et al.,  56). Listening to conversations at the family table and watching splendid performances made Aleksandra privy to the secrets of stagecraft, and considering her close connection to the Ballets Russes as a new era in Modern dance performance, future researchers will no doubt evaluate their influence on Khokhlova’s experimental acting style and her worldview. Certainly her childhood exposure to theater instilled a passionate, selfless dedication to art–the kind of idealistic commitment typical of the early twentieth-century Russian intelligentsia. Later in her memoirs she wrote that working in cinema was for her “the most important thing in life” (Kuleshov and Khokhlova 1975, 62). Perhaps this commitment fortified her against the daunting challenges of  Soviet state cinema work–from a drastic lack of resources to censorship and Party pressure.

As we learn from the memoirs, one more childhood influence reinforced an idealistic view of the actor’s profession–Konstantin Stanislavsky, director of the Moscow Art Theater and close friend of Aleksandra’s parents (1975, 54). Stanislavsky  taught how to approach the actor’s work as a search for authenticity, for ways to convey the irreducible complexity of the character’s inner world. Alexandra’s relationship with the Stanislavsky school, however, is often overlooked because her career as a film actress evolved under the banner of Soviet avant-garde, which cut ties with established theater traditions. Yet, Kuleshov’s desire to revolutionize cinema was fueled by the same hatred of stage clichés and bad acting that compelled Stanislavsky to search for new forms in the theater. Echoing her husband’s disdain for the histrionic acting in film dramas of the past, Aleksandra wrote: “I absolutely agree with Stanislavsky, who said that the best film actors are animals; they move in a way that pertains to them–organically, naturally, truthfully, and therefore, artistically. A tiger onscreen walks just like a tiger…whereas people representing other people often come across as unnatural and non-artistic” (1975, 58).

