In histories of early Chinese cinema, Pu Shunqing is only mentioned in passing as China’s first female scriptwriter for Cupid’s Puppets (1925), a Great Wall Film Company film co-directed by her husband, Hou Yao, and Mei Xuechou. The film is noted as the first Chinese film narrated from a female perspective (Li and Hu 143). Great Wall was founded in Brooklyn, New York, by Chinese students studying in the U.S. and then relocated to Shanghai in 1923. Pu had worked for Great Wall as a scriptwriter and as an actress between 1924 and 1926 before she moved on to Minxin Film Company where she wrote her next three screenplays. Although her contributions are rarely discussed or even known, until the late 1920s, Pu was the only woman to be credited as a scriptwriter both in film prints and publicity ads.

1926 Minxin Advertisement of Company personnel. Private Collection.

Before making films, Pu Shuqing was already a known playwright. While majoring in political economy at Southeast University, Nanjing, Pu pursued her love of stage drama by writing for and performing in the Southeast Drama Society, a club she co-founded with her then-schoolmate, Hou Yao (Law 42; H. Li 23). Pu’s renowned three-act play, “Paradise on Earth,” twists the plot of the Book of Genesis by introducing a female character, “Wisdom,” who encourages Eve first to eat the apple in the Garden of Eden and then to build a paradise on earth. Eve then persuades Adam to work hard on their own paradise, playing “an active role in shaping her own and Adam’s destiny” (G. Li 3) while reversing the literary pattern of women as receiver of men’s enlightenment (Liu 116). Pu’s call for women’s liberation is loud and clear when “Wisdom” declares, “if you don’t believe in God, he will disappear.” Before the curtain falls, the character of God actually disappears. Her one-act play, “Daybreak,” presents a nameless “woman” and her husband “man,” whose peaceful rural lives are disturbed by the appearance of a Factory Demon. The Factory Demon takes them to the city where they encounter Money Demon, Ethics Demon, and Public-Opinion Demon. The demons enchain the woman’s body and her husband cannot save her. “Wisdom” appears again, bringing a light of Consciousness and encourages her to fight.  When the woman begins to fight the demons herself, nine fairies with lights marked Independence, Autonomy, Self-improvement, Self-encouragement, Self-respect, and so on help the woman rise to her feet and tear off the chains around her body (Pu 1927, 96-98). As later critics observed: “although adopting a non-realist form, it touches real problems of society and thus carries a realistic significance” (Chen and Dong 129-30).

Pu Shunqing’s headshot from 1926 Minxin Advertisement of the Company Personnel. Private Collection.

