In the 1930s Fanchon Royer was famous for being one of the few female producers in Hollywood, but she got her start in the industry during the silent era as a journalist, publicist, and producer. She was born Fanchon Pauline Royer on January 21, 1902 in Des Moines, Iowa. Her parents, Elwood A. and Jessie Havens Royer, had a contentious relationship and they divorced in 1907, the same year as the birth of their second child, Robert (Royer 1960, 303). She had a peripatetic childhood, moving between her maternal grandmother’s house in Minneapolis, her father’s in Des Moines, and roaming with her restless mother, attending ten different schools in nine and a half years. She was allowed to remain with her father, a prosperous wholesale grocer, long enough to attend East Des Moines High School, where she acted in the senior play and served as the first female editor of the school’s monthly literary magazine, Quill (1960, 303).

Scan of Fanchon Royer’s 1915 Iowa Census Card. Private Collection. 

She graduated in 1918 at sixteen and moved with her mother and brother to Hollywood where her mother opened a real estate agency, Royer Realty, while Fanchon took classes in journalism and short story writing at University of Southern California. However, she wanted to act in films so she wrote a letter to Douglas Fairbanks. He replied, arranging a meeting for her with his casting director Jimmy Hogan, who in turn referred her to the casting chief at Famous Players-Lasky Corporation, Lou Goodstadt, who found work for her as a film extra (Tildesley 1929, 100). Royer appeared in Cecil B. DeMille’s 1918 remake of The Squaw Man. She tried to find more work as an actress, running an ad in June 1919 in the trade publication Camera! in which she called herself “a versatile ingénue,” but that career did not take off (15). She later told fan magazine Screenland “that one year in pictures contained more heartbreaks than I have ever known, before or since” (Tildesley  100). So she went to work for Camera!

Camera! masthead, October 1920.

