Esterina Zuccarone was born in Foggia, in southern Italy, into a family of seven daughters and one son. In 1912 her family moved to Turin, joining the flow of migrants from the South to the North of Italy that, in those years, involved many people. The transition from a rural to an industrial society allowed Esterina to grow up with more emancipated female role models, starting with her older sisters who, in the new urban environment, decided to leave home to find work (de Miro d’Ayeta 2007, 229). In particular, one of her sisters started working in one of the numerous local textile mills, allowing the young Esterina to familiarize herself with skills such as precision, sense of proportion, and attention to detail, which were necessary to produce good quality and stylish garments.

In Turin, the young girl was witness to the development of modern life and came into contact with the latest technological innovations of the time—cars and railways, gramophones and buses, cameras and sewing machines, to name just a few. There was also the emerging cinematographic industry, a sector that made use of the manual ability of seamstresses for film developing, printing, and editing, allowing many women to get involved with the fascinating world of cinema—its glamour, its stories, its magnificent settings—and, consequently, to imagine new aspirations and ways of life (de Miro d’Ayeta 230).

Despite her father’s resistance—as a typical conservative Southern Italian man—Esterina, too, became a seamstress at the age of twelve. A few years later, at the age of fourteen, she found a job at La Positiva, the development and printing section of Giovanni Pastrone’s Itala Film. As Esterina remarked about her work in those early years:

Il lavoro era duro, dodici, quattordici ore di lavoro e la paga era bassa. Che ero brava lo capirono subito, a diciassette anni ero la capo reparto di una bella squadra di dieci uomini e tutti mi davano retta! [Trans.: The work was hard, twelve, fourteen hours of work and the pay was low. They understood immediately that I was good, so at seventeen I was the forewoman of a beautiful ten-men team and all of them gave heed to me!] (Cossu 2008, 21).

