Emma Gendron was probably the main female figure in Quebec during the silent film era, but her importance appeared only recently along with new research about  the early cinema and its centennial. Ongoing research about her career as a screenwriter will probably also reveal more about her motion picture film activity, but she is now recognized as the first important screenwriter in Quebec. She wrote at least two scripts that were brought to the screen by her probable lover, Joseph-Arthur Homier—Madeleine de Verchères (1922), a biopic about a New France heroine, and La drogue fatale (1924), a thriller in which the drug mafia kidnaps the police chief’s daughter. Gendron might have written other scripts and might also have been more involved in directing these films, but nothing is proven as the films, and along with most of the relevant paper archives, were destroyed.

Flyer (in English) for the film Madeleine de Verchères (1922), Emma Gendron (w). Courtesy of La Cinémathèque Québécoise.

Like many scriptwriters, Gendron started her career as a journalist. Born in 1895 in a small Canadian village, she came to Montreal to study and started sending texts to newspapers and magazines. She was hired around 1918 by an important publisher, Poirier and Bessette, to write columns about women’s fashion and romance under the alias “Manon.” She also started writing serial romances published in the popular magazine Le Samedi. The publisher asked her to write a cinema fan column in their new magazine, Le Panorama, launched in 1919. In 1922, she wrote the play “Namounah,”a drama based on the history of a native princess who falls in love with a white man.  Gendron then met Joseph-Arthur Homier, a well-known professional photographer who also had made newsreel films about Montreal. The nature of their relation has never been completely clear, but until Homier’s death in 1934 they worked together very closely despite the fact that he was a married man with children.

Flyer (in French) for the film Madeleine de Verchères (1922), Emma Gendron (w). Courtesy of La Cinémathèque Québécoise.

