Maude Adams was a hugely successful American stage actress of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. She was perhaps most famous for her performance as Peter Pan. Whilst she never appeared on screen she nevertheless made a significant contribution to the film industry through research she coordinated into lighting technology and color cinematography during the 1920s. Notoriously private, Adams gave few interviews and few personal papers survive. As a result, her own thoughts on her work remain elusive and, for the most part, this research has relied on film trade journals, newspaper reports, and previous biographies.

Maude Adams in play “L’Aiglon.” Courtesy of the Library of Congress.

During her theatrical career, Adams became interested in stage production and in particular stage lighting technology and design and came to work closely with technicians and engineers on her productions. Her most significant collaboration was with Bassett Jones, an electrical and lighting engineer consultant, who she worked with between approximately 1905 and 1915. Together they developed and modified incandescent electrical lighting for the theater. Incandescent lighting had been developed during the nineteenth century and used filament wire heated to a high temperature by an electric current until it glowed to produce light. However, existing lights were too weak and unwieldy for the theater. Adams and Jones’ research made its use in the theater practicable by making incandescent lighting stronger, smaller, and more mobile.

Adams’ experience in stage productions allowed her to identify problems and opportunities to improve stage lighting, which helped direct the research of technicians such as Jones. In addition, she helped to develop ways to implement new technologies and techniques for the stage. For example, in the case of incandescent lighting, Adams was also credited in The New York Times in 1908 with coordinating research into the development of a light bridge, which held seven incandescent spotlights that could be used during a performance (“Maude Adams Invents”). She also helped to develop many novel lighting effects in her productions.

