Beatrice Tildesley is a little known name. Her status as a woman, an Australian, and a critic has muffled any resonance in traditional film history. But in the 1920s and 1930s she had considerable influence as a leading member of Sydney’s cultural elite. She was one of very few Australian intellectuals to write seriously on the cinema and can lay claim to being the country’s foremost independent film critic and commentator for a decade beginning in the mid-1920s.

Beatrice Tildesley was the third of four children born into a well-to-do small manufacturing family in Staffordshire, England, in 1886. Educated in Birmingham and at Girton College, Cambridge, she left England during the First World War to join her older sister, Evelyn, in Sydney, where she taught classics, tennis, and fencing at a private girls’ school. In 1923, Tildesley “obtained the means of independence” (Rutledge 1990, 230) and thereafter she pursued the active life of a single, female, Australian intellectual: she went to the theatre, recitals, and lectures; she wrote poetry and reviews; she was a member of many political and cultural committees; an art and theatre critic; an amateur actor, and bonne vivante. From 1922 to 1924, she was the regular drama critic for the short-lived Forum: A Journal for Thinking Australians, after which she wrote occasional drama and film reviews and articles for numerous small magazines: the Triad, the Bulletin, Beckitt’s Budget, and The Home. It was her love of theatre which drew Tildesley to what she hoped would be its modern incarnation, moving pictures. For over a decade, she sought to encourage the moving picture industry and its audience to live up to their inherent possibilities. Although her numerous commentaries were couched in moralistic tones, it was the failure of art that Beatrice Tildesley most deplored. She wanted to see and to encourage the best in this most modern art form.

Beatrice Maude Tildesley, December 1922. Courtesy of the State Library of New South Wales.

The first steps in Beatrice Tildesley’s career of civilizing moving pictures were taken in 1924 or 1925, when she joined the Good Film League. The League had been founded in 1922 under the auspices of the National Council of Women of New South Wales (NCW of NSW) acting on a resolution of its parent body, the International Council of Women (ICW). The League’s aims were explicitly crafted to give effect to a moral and aesthetic agenda through a dual practice: censorship and encouragement. It sought to suppress the corrupt and vulgar and to encourage the good and beautiful.

