Ellen O’Mara Sullivan and her husband, James M. Sullivan, started what scholars have called the most prolific indigenous film company of the silent period, the Film Company of Ireland (FCOI). The company began trading in Ireland in 1916, producing primarily historical melodramas and romantic comedies and dramas, all focusing on Irish culture and/or the historical battle for political autonomy from Great Britain. The films had wide release in Dublin and the provinces, and a select few opened in Great Britain and the U.S. Though Sullivan and the FCOI have been the subject of some study, O’Mara Sullivan has received little scholarly attention. Private collections and archival material, however, point to her active participation as the FCOI’s co-director, running the company with her husband until her death in 1919.

Ellen O’Mara Sullivan. Private Collection. 

Shortly after O’Mara Sullivan’s 1910 marriage to the Irish-born American, discussions began on an indigenous Irish film company. In March 1916, her husband and banker Henry Fitzgibbon registered the company in Dublin, according to the “Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Film Company of Ireland, Limited,” held in the National Archives of Ireland. The agreement indicates that anyone holding shares could function as company director (n.p). Fitzgibbon appears to have served only as a financial advisor. Sources, such as the James O’Mara Papers at the National Library of Ireland, however, acknowledge both O’Mara Sullivan and her husband as working company directors. She came from a wealthy Limerick family that not only fronted the money to start the company, but also financed its productions. Liam Ó Laoghaire’s handwritten notes and his unpublished interview with her daughter, Sheila Sullivan Callaghan, confirm O’Mara Sullivan’s role as co-director. In the interview, her daughter notes that the FCOI was the family business and that both her parents were active in production and sales. Dr. Michael Rynne further identifies O’Mara Sullivan as one of the directors in a 1965 letter to historian Poinsias Ó Conluain. Rynne explains that he visited the company offices several times a week in 1917-1918 and that O’Mara Sullivan and her husband were the only directors taking an active role in company business. Rynne played a starving teenager in one of the company’s films, Knocknagow (1918), and his mother Mary (O’Mara Sullivan’s sister) also had a small role in the film. According to O’Mara Sullivan’s granddaughter, novelist Mary Rose Callaghan, family members frequently served as actors, crew, and company workers.

O’Mara Sullivan’s involvement in the shipping, distribution, and marketing of their films in the U.S. is documented in letters to her niece Hazel and husband Karl. The letters are housed in Mary Rose Callaghan’s Private Collection and are explored in studies by Dan Schultz and Maryanne Felter. In 1918 O’Mara Sullivan and her husband left their young children in the care of a nanny and went to New York to oversee the sales of what she continually refers to in the letters as “our films.” They also launched a branch of the company in the U.S. Her uncle Joseph, an opera singer, was on the board of directors and spent time in the U.S. organizing the company, according to documents in the James O’Mara Papers. In one of the first letters to Hazel on July 27, 1918, O’Mara Sullivan talks about having to “pawn her rings” to get the films out of customs. Other letters discuss sale negotiations, where the films are screening, and successful runs.

