The remarkably prolific fan magazine writer Gladys Hall was born in New York City in 1891. According to typed biographical notes located in folder 541 of the Gladys Hall Papers at the Margaret Herrick Library, the young Gladys graduated from St. Gabriel’s School for Girls in Peekskill, New York. By her own account, Hall began writing popular poetry and short stories at an early age, and was published in magazines like Munsey’s, Cavalier, and H. L. Mencken’s The Smart Set. Hall married photographer Russell E. Ball on February 1, 1912, when she was twenty years old. That same month, a poem by Hall entitled “Fetterless” was published in The Motion Picture Story Magazine, the first movie fan publication, which had been launched by J. Stuart Blackton and Eugene V. Brewster the previous year. By December 1913, Hall was a regular contributor to the magazine and was on staff as one of several associate editors.

Gladys Hall portrait. Courtesy of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Margaret Herrick Library. 

The Motion Picture Story Magazine was modeled on popular fiction publications of the time, and in its early years each issue featured a dozen or more photoplay stories written in novelized form. As an aspiring author, Hall appears to have found a great deal of success writing in this genre, which took the often relatively simple plot lines of films and spun them into short fiction. A publicity page located in a scrapbook in the Gladys Hall Papers states that she wrote between two and three hundred of these photoplay stories in the first decade of her career (1922, n.p.). During this time, Hall also contributed feature stories, profiles, and humor pieces to The Motion Picture Story Magazine, renamed Motion Picture Magazine in 1914, and edited the magazine’s “Public Opinions of Popular Plays and Players” column. According to an article entitled “Good Things A-Coming for 1918,” Hall and her fellow associate editors were also assigned to write many of Motion Picture Magazine’s monthly features, including “Greenroom Jottings, the Movie Gossip-Shop, Limericks, puzzles, photoplay reviews, verses, and various other departments, with no accredited authors” (121). During this time, Hall was also continuing to write fiction and poetry, as well as serialized novels and plays, and was regularly submitting her work to the many popular magazines of the day. Early in her career, like many fan magazine writers, Hall began using a number of pen names, including Faith Service, Janet Reid, and Russell E. Smith, though the vast majority of her stories were published under her own name.

Motion Picture Magazine editorial staff, circa 1910. Courtesy of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Margaret Herrick Library. 

