Marie Stopes, scientist, birth control activist, and author, was born in Scotland and moved to London in her teens. Her father was an architect and her mother a Shakespeare scholar and campaigner for women’s education. Prodigiously bright, Stopes had earned two doctoral degrees by the age of twenty-five and enjoyed early academic success in paleobotany (the study of fossil plants). Her first marriage, in 1911, was not a success and after five years she secured an annulment on grounds of non-consummation. In the meantime, she had embarked on research in sexology, work which included observation of her own sexual feelings, and had met and exchanged ideas with US birth control campaigner Margaret Sanger. In 1918, her book Married Love, subtitled A New Contribution to the Solution of Sex Difficulties, was published and she married her second husband, Humphrey Roe, retaining her maiden name. The same year also saw the publication of Wise Parenthood, which dealt explicitly with contraception. These books sold in hundreds of thousands and went into numerous editions; by 1921, when she opened her first birth control clinic, Stopes had become a household name. Unheard of in its time, her unique selling point was the idea that women’s happiness and sexual fulfillment in marriage rested upon their ability to control their own fertility.

Marie Stopes, 1904

During the late 1910s, Stopes cultivated an interest in cinema, which she considered “the greatest social influence since the discovery of printing” (qtd. in Stead 2011, 78), serving on the 1917 Cinema Commission of Inquiry as a representative of the Incorporated Society of Authors, Playwrights and Composers. The Commission’s remit was to inquire into “the physical, social, educational, and moral influences of the cinema, with special reference to young people” and the “present position and future development of the cinematograph, with special reference to its social and educational value” (National Council of Public Morals 1917, ix). Stopes’s view was that the huge appeal of cinema to ordinary people had hitherto been exploited solely for commercial gain and that opportunities to harness it for purposes of art and education had been disregarded. Several years later, according to an undated typescript of a speech held in the Marie Stopes Collection at the Wellcome Library, she decided to “give myself a little holiday from my other and more serious preoccupations” and step into the breach (n.p.).

Married Love (1923) pressbook cover. Courtesy of the British Film Institute. 

