Lotte Reiniger made over sixty films, of which eleven are considered lost and fifty to have survived. Of the surviving films for which she had full artistic responsibility, eleven were created in the silent period if the three-part Doktor Dolittle (1927-1928) is considered a single film. Reiniger is known to have worked on—or contributed silhouette sequences to—at least another seven films in the silent era, and a further nine in the sound era. Additionally, there is evidence of her involvement in a number of film projects that remained at conceptual or pre-production stages.

Lotte Reiniger with paper figure. Private Collection.

Reiniger is best known for her pioneering silhouette films, in which paper and cardboard cut-out figures, weighted with lead, and hinged at the joints—the more complex the characters’ narrative role, the larger their range of movements, and therefore, the more hinges for the body—were hand-manipulated from frame to frame and shot via stop motion photography. The figures were placed on an animation table and usually lit from below. In some of her later sound films the figures were lit both from above and below, depending on the desired visual effect. Framed with elaborate backgrounds made from varying layers of translucent paper or colorful acetate foils for color films, Reiniger’s characters were created and animated with exceptional skill and precision.

Reiniger’s early films ranged in length from brief shorts of less than 300 feet to Die Abenteuer des Prinzen Achmed/The Adventures of Prince Achmed (1923-1926), a film that is arguably the first full-length animated feature and is thus considered to be among the milestones of cinema history. Reiniger wrote the screenplays for her films and worked as a major contributor on a number of live action films, for example, as assistant director on films made by her husband Carl Koch. These included the wartime Italian productions Tosca (1940-1941) and La Signora dell’Ovest/The Lady of the West (1941-1942). Among her earliest involvement in motion pictures was her production of decorative silhouettes for the titles of feature films directed by Paul Wegener and Rochus Gliese: Rübezahl’s Hochzeit/Rübezahl’s Marriage (1916), Der Rattenfänger von Hameln/The Pied Piper of Hamlyn (1918), and Apokalypse/Apocalypse (1918). She also made animated silhouette sequences as well as shadow play sequences included in Die Schöne Prinzessin von China/The Beautiful Princess of China (1917) and Der Verlorene Schatten/The Lost Shadow (1920).

