In the spring of 1929, the Port Arthur Amateur Cinema Society made Canadian history. To a crowded house in the city of Port Arthur, in Ontario’s largest theatre, their first feature-length film, A Race for Ties (1929), premiered. Not only was it one of the few feature-length films made in Canada at the time, but it holds the distinction of being the first amateur feature-length film in Canada, and the first of three that involved the talents of Dorothea Mitchell, a British-born, India-raised women who is best known as Ontario’s first single woman to be granted a homestead in that province’s history.

Dorothea Mitchell. Courtesy of the Thunder Bay Historical Museum Society. 

Mitchell’s involvement in film production resulted from a confluence of historical circumstance. The daughter of a British railway engineer, Mitchell spent the majority of her early life in India and received an education proper for one of the colonial elite. By the late nineteenth century, family fortunes had changed. In 1894, her mother’s health forced the family back to England. In 1897, her father’s death while away in India forced Mitchell and her sister to become governesses in the homes of the wealthy. Seeing no future in this line of work, Mitchell left for Canada.

Dorothea Mitchell arrived in Canada in 1904 and after short stints in Toronto and Hamilton, she answered an ad for a job as the companion to a mine manager’s wife at Silver Mountain, Ontario, a whistle-stop 75 kilometres from the then city of Fort William at the head of Lake Superior. When the mine closed shortly after her arrival, she turned her misfortune into opportunity by taking over the local post office and becoming the railway stationmaster. In 1911, she petitioned the Government of Ontario for the right to obtain a piece of crown land, arguing that she was responsible for the welfare of her mother and sister, and, after a feisty exchange of letters, which are held in the Archives of Ontario, Dorothea Mitchell became the first single woman in Ontario history to be granted a homestead. From there, she ran a small sawmill and lumber company, often filling in for men who quit suddenly. Her fair treatment of immigrant workers and commercial success against the lumber barons of the period earned her the respect of businessmen in Northwestern Ontario and Manitoba and the local nickname the “Lady Lumberjack.” In 1921, Dorothea Mitchell retired to the relative comfort of the city of Port Arthur, adjacent to Fort William. In Port Arthur she worked as an accountant and later became one of the first female real estate agents in Ontario.

