Adela Sequeyro was born in the port city of Veracruz, Mexico, to Federico Sequeyro Arreola and Virginia Haro y Gutiérrez Zamora. The Mexican Revolution, which extended from 1910 to 1917, devastated the family fortune and compelled them to move to the town of Cuautitlán on the outskirts of Mexico City. Sequeyro studied at a French-English school in the capital and, at an unusually early age, began a career in cinema journalism in 1921.

The recent discovery of well-preserved 16mm copies of two films directed by Adela Sequeyro —Más allá de la muerte/Beyond Death (1935) and La mujer de nadie/Nobody’s Woman (1937)—sparked an overdue reevaluation of Sequeyro’s importance in the history of Mexican cinema. Before the discovery of these two films, Sequeyro was known primarily for her acting roles in Mexican silent film melodramas and as a journalist whose work appeared in many Mexico City newspapers and periodicals.

Adela Sequeyro. Private Collection

In the 1920s, Sequeyro began appearing occasionally in films opposite Ricardo Mutio, a well-known theatrical actor in Virginia Fábregas’s company. In 1923, Adela Sequeyro—or Perlita, as she was known—starred in El hijo de la loca/The Crazy Woman’s Son (José S. Ortiz 1923), followed by leading roles in at least five other silent features: Atavismo/Throwback (1923) and Un drama en la aristocracia/A Drama in the Aristocracy (1924), both directed by Gustavo Sáenz de Sicilia; Ortiz’s No matarás/Thou Shalt Not Kill, (1924); Los compañeros del silencio/Companions of Silence (Basiliao Zubiaur 1925); and El sendero gris/The Gray Path (Jesús Cárdenas 1927). It was during these shoots that Sequeyro learned the secrets of film direction, and she probably derived her taste for melodrama from the same sources. In 1923, Rafael Bermúdez Zataraín published a note in El Universal entitled “The success of the national film, The Crazy Woman’s Son,” declaring that “this film has earned both the critics’ and the Silent Art lovers’ approval, and has come to boost our moribund industry, thrilling the audience and crowding the first film theatres of Mexico” (n.p.).

