Agnes Christine Johnston repeatedly claimed that she wrote and sold her first scenario, Wanted for Murder, at the age of sixteen. In 1925 she described that effort to the Los Angeles Times as a “bloodthirsty” story about a man who was tried for his own murder (D13). Perhaps she was sixteen, but she says she is “just eighteen” in the thank you letter she wrote in 1914 to Vitagraph Company of America president Albert Smith. Here she describes her ambition to go to the Columbia School of Journalism, says how happy the check he sent made her, and raves that “even dances and parties pale beside ‘movey’ writing.” We do not know if that first scenario was actually produced, but her brief description mirrors the title of a later Vitagraph film, Tried for His Own Murder (1916).

MGM publicity photo, Agnes Christine Johnston. Courtesy of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Margaret Herrick Library.

However, when Johnston officially joined the film industry in 1915, it was at first not as a scenarist, but as a stenographer in Vitagraph’s Brooklyn studio, at a reported salary of $10 per week, she told the Los Angeles Times (D13). In those first few years, she wrote scenarios for comedy-dramas released by Vitagraph, the Thanhouser Company, and the Pathé Exchange. During this period, Johnston must have worked with Marguerite Bertsch, head of the Vitagraph scenario department, whose manual on how to write for motion pictures described many devices developed at the studio. In this tradition, Johnston also wrote quite thoughtfully about the new technological requirements for as well as the ancient origins of the moving picture. Not every scenario writer thought so deeply about cinema as a kind of primal expression, although the theory she espouses is not original to her, as the idea that silent cinema could convey emotions without words was popular. Lillian Gish even wrote an encyclopedia entry on motion pictures as a basic universal language.

In a 1917 Moving Picture World article, “The Comedy Scenario,” Johnston calls the “comedy-drama” the ideal photoplay because the motion picture is “elemental.” In its reliance on “action,” she says, it hearkens back to the caveman: “It provokes first emotions, and then thought through those emotions,” through the “primal feelings” of laughter and tears. She also insists that the silent cinema not rely on the spoken word, claiming that it must be “more vital and ever-changing.” In the vocabulary emerging in the silent era, she also mentions the necessity of “continuity” (413). Her use of the term “continuity” here is interesting as it seems to encompass the term’s various meanings—from a script that facilitated efficient shooting to the way writing in conjunction with editing could produce a story that the viewer experienced as smooth and uninterrupted (Staiger 1985, 189–91).

