Agnes Adele Wangenheim was born in Sydney in 1872. At the age of eighteen, she married Barney Kurtz, but divorced him not long after. She was Agnes Kurtz on the first of October 1898, when she married Sydney-born stage actor John Francis Henry Gavin, then twenty-three years old. They were a striking pair: John, tall and dark, bluff and hearty, with a broad smile; Agnes smaller, attractive, with a clear, olive complexion and bright, dark eyes. Together they worked as actors in the Bland Holt stage company and in vaudeville for many years before entering motion pictures together in H.A. Forsyth’s 1910 production of Thunderbolt in which John played the title character and Agnes may have played a gypsy. The Gavins were not unusual for their time, working as a partnership, but with the husband in the more public and visible role. On Forsyth’s next film, Moonlite (1910), John moved into direction while Agnes played the aboriginal girl Bunda in blackface. John then directed several films in 1911 for Crick and Finlay (Ben Hall and His Gang; Frank Gardiner, King of the Road; The Assigned Servant; Keane of Kalgoorlie) and followed Stanley Crick into the Australian Photo-Play Company, directing The Mark of the Lash (1911). He then branched out on his own, forming John F. Gavin Productions, which produced two further films in 1911: The Drover’s Sweetheart and Assigned to his Wife. 

The Assigned Servant (1911). Courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive of Australia.

Agnes, meanwhile, had continued to take small roles in John’s films, but was also credited as scenario writer for all the films from Ben Hall and His Gang (1911) onwards. Most of these told stories about the outback and most were set in earlier times. Bushranging was a favorite theme—not just featuring the well-known historical and literary characters such as Thunderbolt, Moonlite, Ben Hall, and Frank Gardiner, but also with their original subplots. The Assigned Servant (1911) is the story of a convict who marries the daughter of the man to whom he has been assigned and, as a consequence, is sent back to prison from which he escapes to take up life as a bushranger. Convicts featured again in The Mark of the Lash and Assigned to his Wife. In fact, in this period Agnes wrote only one scenario of contemporary city life and that was not an original story. Keane of Kalgoorlie (1911) was taken from the play by E. W. O’Sullivan, based on the novel by Arthur Wright, and concerned horse racing and the gambling that surrounded it. The Australian film industry in which the Gavins worked was dependent largely on nonfiction; that is, it recorded contemporary events. However, fiction was also popular and Australia moved into multireel fiction earlier than other countries. When they formed John F. Gavin Productions, John and Agnes were riding this wave: Assigned to his Wife, which opened in Sydney in October 1911, was 4,000 feet long. The Drover’s Sweetheart (1911), somewhat shorter at around 3,000 feet, may or may not have opened as there is no record that it was ever screened publicly.

Ad for The Martyrdom of Nurse Cavell (1916). National Film and Sound Archive of Australia.

