Anna Hofman-Uddgren was a Swedish actress, vaudeville artist, scriptwriter, theater director, and film director. When she became the first woman film director in Sweden in 1911 she was already a well-established profile within the entertainment business in Stockholm. Hofman-Uddgren’s film involvement was not limited to production. Already in the summer of 1898 she introduced moving pictures, shown by a Mr. Hough from Edison’s Wargraph, at the variety theater Sveateatern, located in downtown Stockholm, and the following year, after Sveateatern had been destroyed in a fire, Hofman-Uddgren programmed moving pictures at Victoriateatern from May onwards (Waldekranz 1983, 117). Around a decade later, during a short period in 1911-1912, she directed six films of which only one survives. A possible reason for Hofman-Uddgren’s relative oblivion might be that the surviving film from her productions, Fadren/The Father (1912), based on August Strindberg’s drama, is a rather static example of filmed theater.

Anna Hofman-Uddgren. Courtesy of the Swedish Film Institute. 

Hofman-Uddgren’s biographical background is filled with gaps and blanks. Rumor has it that Anna Maria Hammarström, her name at birth, who was raised by a single mother, was actually the daughter of Oscar II, King of Sweden and Norway. As Marika Lagercrantz argues, this is probably why Hofman-Uddgren avoided giving out any biographical information and thereby could form her own star persona (Lagercrantz 2009, 186-192). Hofman-Uddgren nevertheless started to write her memoirs in the 1920s. Only the very beginning of her biography has been found, consisting of four typewritten pages describing her first encounter with the King at the age of seventeen, although it remains in a private collection. Even though the King would finance her studies in Paris, as these pages reveal, it was not until after Hofman-Uddgren’s death that any of this information was published (Lagercrantz 186-189).

All of the films produced in the 1911-1912 period seem to have been commissioned by Stockholm’s leading film exhibitor (having as many as six theaters) and distributor, the former horse-dealer, N.P. Nilsson, who wanted domestically-produced films for his theaters to compete with other Swedish producers. Together with Otto Bökman, an experienced film photographer, Hofman-Uddgren made six motion picture films. Gustaf Uddgren, a well-known journalist and writer whom Anna Hofman had married in 1900, would become another of her closest collaborators during these film productions. He is credited with writing the film script for Fadren, Fröken Julie/Miss Julie (1912) (together with Hofman-Uddgren), Stockholmsfrestelser eller Ett norrlandsherrskaps äventyr i den sköna synderskans stad (1911), and the scenario for Systrarna/The Sisters (1912).

