On May 1, 1917, actress Bessie Barriscale invited members of the press corps and trade papers to the Paralta Plays company offices in New York. Agnes Smith, there on behalf of the Morning Telegraph, reported on the event a few days later, confessing to her readers that she had not initially known why the press had been summoned. However, the journalist quickly realized why when she arrived and saw a new sign on the door: “The Bessie Barriscale Feature Company.” Inside the Paralta offices she found Barriscale with her husband, actor Howard Hickman, director Oscar Apfel, and producer Robert Brunton. Announcing the formation of her own company whose pictures would be distributed by Paralta, Barriscale stressed the point that “good stories [would be] her first consideration” (n.p.). The Bessie Barriscale Feature Company was to start work in a new state-of-the-art studio in Hollywood, where, according to the Moving Picture World, they hoped to produce six to eight features per year with their first project to be the still extant title Rose O’Paradise (1918) (1100).

Publicity portrait Bessie Barriscale. Courtesy of Stanford University. 

Barriscale’s career in the moving pictures had started a few years earlier when Lasky, of what was then called the Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Company, bought the film rights to ten plays produced by theatre impresario David Belasco (Birchard 2004, 30). Barriscale, who had starred in the successful Belasco play “Rose of the Rancho” and may have originated the part of Juanita, was invited to repeat the performance in the 1914 film of the same name directed by Cecil B. DeMille, the Atlanta Constitution reported (D8). At twenty, Barriscale was already a veteran actress. She had been raised in the theatre milieu by her actress mother and had acted on the stage from the young age of five. She met her husband Howard Hickman on the stage, and the two had worked together as members of the same stock companies for years, according to a 1998 Silent Film Monthly profile.

Upon completing her first film, Barriscale and Hickman left the legitimate stage for what would be a period of seven years. According to an unidentified article in the Bessie Barriscale clippings file in the Museum of Modern Art, Thomas H. Ince had been impressed with the performance of the young actress in Rose of the Rancho and consequently brought her to work for the New York Motion Picture Company, where she stayed for three years. When her contract expired, she left the company, which had been sold to Triangle Film Corporation. While Barriscale had quickly become a major star with Ince’s company, the films she acted in were easily forgettable.

