Blanche MacIntosh is a familiar name thanks to her adaptation of Helen Mather’s novel Comin’ Thro’ the Rye (1923) for Cecil Hepworth, a film often discussed as a key example of British silent cinema. The film though tends to be viewed as primarily Hepworth’s work, leaving MacIntosh’s contribution unexplored. Yet from 1912 until 1924 Blanche MacIntosh wrote twenty-eight films for Hepworth, and for the latter part of this period she was his chief scenario writer. When and why she assumed this role is one of the many mysteries about her life and her industry role.

The first mystery is the spelling of her surname, which was routinely printed in the trade press as well as in later histories as either McIntosh or MacIntosh. In fact she was born Blanche Mary MacIntosh on July 19, 1877, in Marylebone, London. She married in September 1908, becoming Blanche MacIntosh Hubbard, but would retain her maiden name as a nom de plume for her screenwriting work. Far from being a professional writer, MacIntosh was a Hepworth family friend. According to Hepworth’s memoirs, he first met her on holiday in Deal in 1891 when the Hepworth and MacIntosh families formed a lasting friendship (25). The young Blanche showed an aptitude for writing although according to the 1901 UK census, she was working from home as a second class clerk in the civil service. Some time after her marriage and before the birth of her second daughter Lorna in 1913, she left the civil service and moved from Marylebone to Clarence Road in Hersham, which is a walk of about fifteen minutes from the Hepworth Studios in Walton on Thames. She was almost certainly living there when, in 1912, Hepworth asked her to write a scenario for a film that became In Wolf’s Clothing (1912). We could conjecture that Hepworth knew her as a family friend whom he turned to when his writer-director Lewin Fitzhamon, who had been with him since 1903, left to start his own company. Hepworth’s request marked the beginning of a working relationship that lasted until the company went bankrupt in 1924. Further proof of her commitment to scenario writing by virtue of her friendship with Hepworth is the fact that after the bankruptcy, MacIntosh wrote no further films.

There are no records documenting MacIntosh’s arrangement with Hepworth, although some details can be sketched out here thanks to the memory of her daughter, Lorna Hubbard, who was interviewed for this article shortly before her death in 2007. It is not clear whether MacIntosh was a full-time employee or paid by the script, but according to her daughter, she worked from home, visiting the studio infrequently. Lorna also described her as a professional reader whose job it was to analyze books in an effort to determine whether they would make suitable films. MacIntosh’s husband George Joseph Hubbard regularly checked out books for her from the Mudie Library, and when she found one suitable for adaptation, she took the idea to Hepworth.

In this respect, MacIntosh was distinct from some if not all the other Hepworth writers. Sometime between 1912 and 1914, Hepworth created a permanent scenario department at his studio, hiring scenario writers like Blanche and scenario editors, like Victor Montefiore, who also wrote, but would in addition routinely read scenarios sent in by members of the public, submissions actively encouraged by the studio via both the Hepworth Picture Play Paper (6) and the trade press (Elliott).

