Mary O’Connor worked at numerous companies, in positions such as a manager of the scenario department for Lasky studios, as an assistant to producers, and as a scenario writer. O’Connor’s work with the Screen Writers Guild and its social club, The Writers, is perhaps the part of her career that offers the most fruitful avenue for future research. O’Connor will never be remembered for particular films or even as a particularly powerful member of any one company. However, she was a permanent fixture of the Screen Writers Guild during the 1920s and 1930s and, as such, she offers a lens through which further scholarship can understand how women’s roles in early guilds and unions were central to the development of Hollywood industries.

Mary O’Connor, 1910. Private Collection.

The earliest record of O’Connor’s work in Los Angeles is a 1914 article in Moving Picture World, though this source states that she had been working as an “editor, reader, and publicity manager” at Vitagraph prior to moving to a role as scenario editor at Ursona (Irvine 660). Between 1914 and 1917, O’Connor worked for D.W. Griffith and was a scenario editor for Majestic-Reliance and Fine Arts. A “Plays and Players” column in Photoplay states that by 1917 she was working as the assistant to Frank E. Woods at Lasky’s studio (1917, 110). In the October 12, 1918 issue of Motion Picture News, an announcement stated that O’Connor was promoted from Woods’ assistant to the head of scenarios and film editing (2381).

According to Moving Picture World, O’Connor resigned from Famous-Players Lasky as the scenario and film editor in December of 1920 and moved to the Paramount scenario department in London to focus on writing (1920, 862). The only two listed film scenarios by O’Connor are The Sins of Rosanne (1920) and Dangerous Lies (1921). One curious story about O’Connor’s career comes first from a family member who was told that if a writer was sent to Europe from Hollywood, it was a way to “put them out to pasture” (Thompson 2015, n.p.). An article on May 14, 1921 in Moving Picture World states that O’Connor was working under Paul Powell to adapt a story to scenario at the London branch of Paramount (190). Yet, by August of 1921, Moving Picture World released a brief notice about the Americanization of the London branch of Paramount (692). The entire organization of the London filmmaking unit was rearranged to showcase American stars and the American style of filmmaking. At this time, O’Connor was sent back to the United States where she returned to Los Angeles and worked in scenarios for some time longer. It is conjecture to say that something happened in the two years that O’Connor moved between Los Angeles, New York, and London, however, coupled with her family’s anecdote, it may indicate an impetus for O’Connor’s involvement in the early Screen Writers Guild and other similar organizations.

