Isabel Acuña met José Nepomuceno, a Filipino film pioneer, while he was shooting his third film, Un Capello Marchito/The Wilted Rosebud (1920), in Manila in 1920. She was sixteen years old, and her younger sister, Luisa Acuña, was starring in the film. Nepomuceno founded Malayan Movies together with his brother, Jesús, in Manila in 1917, after previously having run a successful photography studio there. Two years later they made the earliest known fiction film directed by a Filipino, Dalagang Bukid/Country Maiden (1919) (Tofighian 2008, 78).

Acuña and Nepomuceno married on June 6, 1920 at the Quiapo Church in Manila, a few months after their first meeting. From that time forward, Acuña was involved in the filmmaking process of Malayan Movies. Initially, she primarily worked on scouting talent, costume design, and make-up. She was instrumental in making costume design and make-up an important part of the mise-en-scene of the film, and she is reported to have spent hours on the streets, in bazaars, and in movie houses researching and getting ideas about set designs and costumes (Quirino 1983, 23). Acuña insisted on using simple words in the dialogue and intertitles in order for everyone to understand, and functioned as an informal censor at Malayan Movies as she required no dirty language or inappropriate scenes. As a casting director, she was particularly adept at recruiting young actresses, including convincing parents to permit their daughters to be on the screen as many still looked down on cinema as an art form (Kabristante 1981, n.p.; Quirino 5, 22).

Isabel Acuña and José Nepomuceno, year unknown. Private Collection. 

None of the around eighty films, including thirty-eight silent films, Nepomuceno made are intact, as far as we currently know, which makes the research harder (Tofighian 77-78). Current research has hitherto not considered Acuña as a film pioneer, but rather as a helper and assistant, and in that way this career profile diverges from current historiographical accounts. Most Filipino film historians have omitted the role and impact of Acuña on early Filipino cinema. She is omitted from Lena Strait Paneja’s 1998 analysis of the roles and images of women in early Filipino cinema. The film historian Nick Deocampo describes Acuña’s role in the following way: “The labor to produce film was divided between the Nepomuceno brothers and even Jose’s wife, Isabel Acuña of Iloilo. […] Jose’s wife was the company’s treasurer, casting directress, and hair and make-up supervisor” [my emphasis] (2003, 257).

