Fan Xuepeng was a luminous Chinese film star through the silent era and into the sound era. She was perhaps most famous for her performance as knightly female characters in martial arts films from the late 1920s to the early 1930s. Later she became a regular on Chinese screens, often portraying mothers and was given the nickname “the popular mother.” Far less known, however, was her contribution to the film industry through setting up Qianghua Film Company and working as a producer, special effects designer, and recording engineer in different periods of her life. To explore her film career and to highlight how her work in the industry went beyond just acting, this profile uses Chinese newspapers and magazines from the 1930s and Fan’s own memoirs as the main references.

Special issue of Youlian Magazine on Heroic Son and Daughter (1927), starring Fan Xuepeng. 

Fan was born Yao Xiongfei in 1908 in Jiangsu, to a once-noble family in decline. Her film career started at Youlian Film Company where she was an actress under a short-term contract and a hardworking staff. Her most successful role during this period was perhaps Thirteenth Sister in Heroic Son and Daughter/兒女英雄 (1927), a no longer extant martial arts film that enjoyed a half-a-month run in 1927, saved Youlian Film Company from bankruptcy, and spawned four more sequels. The only extant film starring Fan from this period is Red Heroine/紅俠 (1929). It fell into the category of martial arts-magic spirit film—a highly popular yet short-lived genre melding martial art spectacles with fantastic narratives in an often eerie setting. The exaggeration of martial arts skills, the fascination with the experience of flying, the use of experimental special effects, and the renewed perception and self-perception of the female body in association with the female knight-errant subgenre all found visibility in Red Heroine. As Fan recalled, during the production of Red Heroine, she came up with the idea of dyeing her character with red ink to make her authentically “red” (1956, 66). Although she was never credited as a special effects designer, this visual trick triggered great interest among Nanyang audiences and therefore contributed to the film’s commercial success. According to Fan, Mingxing Film Company even borrowed this idea to portray Red Maiden in The Burning of the Red Lotus Temple/火燒紅蓮寺, a legendary martial arts-magic spirit film series produced between 1928 and 1931 (1956, 66). “Special effects designer” as a category in motion picture credits most likely did not exist in China at that time. In addition to the historiographical problem of lost films, that women could be involved in various aspects of film production without earning a credit (and that these roles might not be clearly defined) also plagues studies of women film pioneers in Chinese silent cinema and may have contributed to an underestimation of Fan behind-the-scenes film work.

Movie Monthly/電影月報 advertisement for Red Heroine (1929). 

