Born in Mexico City in 1904, Cube Bonifant published her distinctive film criticism in newspapers and magazines throughout the early twentieth century. Her criticism covers the end of the silent film era, the transition from silent film to sound motion pictures, and the birth of the sound motion picture industry in Mexico. The need to learn more about the early days of film criticism—especially film criticism written by women—brings one to examine Bonifant’s work. While she was intent on attacking the Hollywood film industry, she had a journalist’s commitment to objectivity. Her colleagues such as Catalina D’Erzell criticized her for her biting, mocking style while at the same time praising her writing.

Cube Bonifant. Private Collection. 

As a young woman, Bonifant published romantic poetry in two national newspapers: Revista de Revistas and El Ilustrado. In 1921, she began to write advice columns that criticized the lifestyles of bourgeois women of her day in the magazine El Universal Ilustrado and later wrote an advice column for men as well. Both columns enabled her to receive and to answer correspondence from readers who gave vent to their troubles by writing to her. Bonifant delighted in replying to each of her faithful correspondents in her acid, mocking style. On February 10, 1927, she was invited by the editor of El Universal Ilustrado to shape her caustic style into film criticism, which she did under the pseudonym Luz Alba. Her articles appeared every week in the section El cine visto por una mujer, which in 1928 was renamed Opiniones de una cineasta de buena fe. Beginning in 1928, Bonifant wrote about Mexican and foreign motion picture stars in the magazine Rotográfico under the pseudonym Aura Stella. She also published columns in the weekly Ilustrado and the magazine Todo until 1940.

Bonifant’s caustic style of film criticism distinguished her from the other female critics and film writers of her day such as Adela Sequeyro, Cecilia del Villar, and Elena Sánchez Valenzuela. What film critic Ángel Miquel would call Bonifant’s “objective” approach appears in her reviews of Hollywood films, which verged on the pejorative (Miquel 1995, 213). This harsh style of observation and her tendency to “call a spade a spade” were what distinguished her from the other female critics of her era. She was especially critical of American filmmakers’ lack of cross-cultural knowledge, which was evident whenever they had to recreate other nations’ folklore and customs. Neither did Hollywood’s faulty history and geography escape her. These observations are summed up in her 1927 review of Edmund Goulding’s Paris (1926) in El Universal Ilustrado:

