Perhaps due to her later fame as the newspaper columnist and controversial radio personality known as “Andrea,” the early film career of Dorothy Gordon has been largely overlooked. Certainly her significant celebrity in Australia in the 1960s overshadowed her comparatively lesser achievements as a silent cinema extra, actor, screenwriter, and art director. The recognition of her contribution to the Australian film industry is further diminished by the loss of her major work as star of Raymond Longford’s Hills of Hate (1926). In addition, her reputation as an entertaining raconteur fond of telling tall stories, especially about herself, leaves much room for doubt about the recorded detail of her early career in both Hollywood and Australian silent films.

Lobby card, The Hills of Hate (1926). Courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive of Australia.

Having developed a taste for appearing on stage, principally as a chorus girl in the 1912 Melbourne production of “Girl in a Train,” Gordon left Australia for the United States in 1915. She arrived in Hollywood brandishing several letters of introduction including one that brought her to the attention of a second cousin working for Jesse Lasky. To supplement a small stipend provided by her father, Gordon took a job as dressmaker in the costume department and developed a reputation for stunt work. At other times she also worked as a scenario reader, writing summaries for each script. In 1916, she was put in stock at Famous Players-Lasky Corporation, later Paramount Pictures, appearing as an extra in uncounted films.

Most knowledge of this period of Gordon’s career comes from her own writings, especially an article for the Australian press published in 1927 and her autobiography Darlings, I’ve Had a Ball! published in 1975. Conjuring the relevant details from Gordon’s entangled account of her various roles in Hollywood is not simple, and further archival and textual research is warranted. In her autobiography Gordon claims to have appeared in at least two Valentino films, The Sheik (1921) as the robber chief’s wife and Blood and Sand (1922) as a Spanish lady. Apparently her relationship to Valentino was so close that she was named as a character witness in his divorce proceedings. She says that she later worked with Jean de Limur on an unproduced screenplay for Valentino and claims to have worked as well with W. C. Fields and Houdini. Gordon made other uncredited appearances in Unseen Forces (1920) and A Wise Fool (1921). Additionally, her work as a production assistant on Cecil B. DeMille’s Ten Commandments (1923) went uncredited.

