“Dorothy is another one of the family who has inherited the art of writing—it is a YOST talent,” wrote Kathryn Yost Boyd in 1925 in an unpublished family history. In 1927, the Los Angeles Times praised Dorothy Yost as being Hollywood’s youngest and most successful scenarist (28). They exaggerated. Although she did begin working in the motion picture industry as a teenager, she would have been as old as twenty-six at the time the article was published, not so young by young Hollywood standards. A prominent writer whose career spanned both the silent and sound eras, Yost worked on more than ninety-four films throughout her lifetime, including Alice Adams (1935) starring Katherine Hepburn, That Girl From Paris (1936) starring Lily Pons, and the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers musicals The Gay Divorcee (1934), Roberta (1935), Swing Time (1936), and The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle (1939). Despite such achievement, the personal life and career of Dorothy Yost remains marginally documented, and little attention has been given to her silent period films, of which only a few survive.

Another unpublished family history, written by Yost’s niece Sally Pritchard around 1958 says that Dorothy was an unusually talented child who demonstrated her natural literary gifts by writing a group of fairy stories at the age of twelve. Born into a family of writers, Yost first experienced the world of professional journalism as a private secretary to her father, editor-in-chief of the Daily News and the Dependent in Santa Barbara, California. Throughout her early teens, she also studied acting and dramatics, appearing in a number of plays produced by the Scovell Juvenile Stock Company. In 1915, Yost left Santa Barbara to take a secretarial course at the Los Angeles Business College. Still a teenager, Yost worked as a secretary at a safe manufacturing company until December 1917 when she took a new secretarial position, this time assisting the scenario editor at the Triangle Film Corporation. Within six months she was promoted to head of the reading department, where she was responsible for reviewing and revitalizing scripts. Soon after, under the supervision and through the encouragement of editor Julian Johnson, who later became editor-in-chief at Paramount Pictures Corporation, Yost began writing scenarios and adaptations. In 1917, then, she may have been the youngest, but more likely was one of the youngest scenario writers in Hollywood at the time. Strangely, this was almost ten years before the Los Angeles Times made their claim that she was the youngest.

Dorothy Yost. Courtesy of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Margaret Herrick Library. 

Still, the claim that Dorothy Yost began young and evidenced talent early can be made, considering, for instance, that she wrote her first continuity script at twenty-one, an adaptation of For the Soul of Rafael (1920). This extant title, based on the 1906 novel of the same name by Marah Ellis Ryan, is set in the old California region of San Juan Capistrano along the US-Mexico border. The recent restoration of an original nitrate tinted 35mm print of the Mexican-American melodrama allows us to examine Hollywood’s representation of ethnic and racial minorities as well as authentic regional settings, details of mise-en-scène, and the kind of cast diversity that distinguished higher class feature productions in the early 1920s. Actress Clara Kimball Young stars as Marta Estevan, a fair-skinned, aristocratic Spaniard educated in a convent who faces an arranged marriage to her guardian’s unruly son, Rafael. At her guardian’s dying side, Marta vows to save Rafael even though she loves another. She soon learns that her peasant maid has lied about the death of Keith Bryton, a white American officer she has fallen in love with after saving him from Indian captors. By the time that Marta learns that her lover is alive, she is married to Rafael. Thus she suppresses her desire for Bryton in order to fulfill her pledge to reform her womanizing husband. The mostly Spanish-Indian cast, including over two hundred Native Americans from reservations near Los Angeles, as well as the Californian outdoor settings, which included existing missions, lends authenticity to the film’s representation of Mexican-American border tensions. The novel’s themes of racial difference, forbidden love, honor, duty, and self-sacrifice are colored with religious sentiment and moral overtones similar to those found in Prodigal Lover, the novel Yost later published in 1937.

