While Dot (Dorothy) Farley is most often identified as a comedic actress, she also seems to have written and directed films. Anthony Slide notes that Farley asserted in a 1923 Illustrated World article that she both wrote and directed dramas and comedies. He thinks that she may not have worked as a director for Mack Sennett’s Keystone Company. She may have directed and written shorts for another company in the first two decades (Slide 1996, 121). Born in Chicago, Illinois, Dot Farley began her acting career at the age of three, and was reportedly featured in a number of stage productions including an E. A. MacDowell Company production of “Wedding Bells,” appearing as “Chicago’s Little Dot” (Waddell III4). A Los Angeles Times 1924 career overview tells us that she continued to work with a Chicago comic-opera company until her voice failed in 1910, at which time she accepted an offer to star in comedy shorts for the Essanay Company (B26).

Dot Farley. Courtesy of the New York Public Library. 

Farley is perhaps best known as one of the earliest members of Mack Sennett’s Keystone comedy troupe, where she developed the trademark facial and bodily distortions that the Atlanta Constitution described as “A Face to Fit Everyone Occasion” (B11). Although she left Keystone after a few years of work, she occasionally returned to play such roles as Ben Turpin’s cross-eyed mother in A Small Town Idol (1921). In 1913, she left the Pathé Company to join the St. Louis Motion Picture Company in Albuquerque, New Mexico. She then moved to Universal in 1915, where she worked in many Luna Company productions including The Near Capture of Jesse James (1915), playing the role of a girl who, inspired by dime Western novels, puts on men’s clothing to live the life of a bandit. Farley continued to have a reputation for playing adventurous roles well into the late silent period. Newspapers reported on her ability to fool cast members and strangers with her disguises and, testimony to her indefatigability, she returned to work the day after sustaining minor burns while filming Listen Lester (1924) for the Sacramento Picture Company. Although she is most well-known for her comedic work during the silent period, Farley was cast in the sound period, starring in a series of domestic comedies at the Radio Keith Orpheum Company, in Cecil B. DeMille’s King of Kings (1927), and taking bit parts in Val Lewton’s Cat People (1942) and Preston Sturges’s Hail the Conquering Hero (1944).

Lantern slide, Border Intrigue (1925), starring Dot Farley. Courtesy of the Cleveland Public Library Digital Gallery, W. Ward Marsh collection.

