Thanks to recently discovered materials, Elena Sánchez Valenzuela has finally received the official recognition she deserves as a journalist; actress; founder, in 1942, of the first Film Archive in Mexico; and documentary filmmaker. It is now clear that she was a seminal figure in Mexican cinema. During the early years of silent motion pictures in Mexico, she acted in two precedent-setting films: Santa (1918), the first and only silent version of Federico Gamboa’s novel of the same title directed by the journalist Luis G. Peredo, and En la hacienda/At the Hacienda (1921), directed by Ernesto Vollrath. She also had roles in three other silent films: El Escándalo (Alfredo B. Cuellar, 1920), La llaga (Luis G. Peredo, 1919), and Barranca trágica (Santiago J. Sierra, 1917). Santa and En la hacienda represent two melodrama subgenres that defined the formula for Mexican melodramas until the 1940s—the brothel and the rural subgenre. In 1927, Sánchez Valenzuela described her experience in Santa for J. M. Sánchez García:

Peredo needed a protagonist, but he did not want to look for her in the theatre, because the heroine of Gamboa—a novel women in Mexico had to read secretly—had to provide the film with the youth of a fifteen-year-old and a natural naivety in her expression… I was a student at Preparatory School in 1918 and one afternoon we skipped classes to go to the film studio Mimí Derba had at Balderas street. I did not wear silk dresses or high heel shoes; I did not even use carmine in my cheeks; my student life was far away from that (n.p.).

En la hacienda was declared the best motion picture of the year in 1921. It premiered at the castle of Chapultepec in front of a very distinguished audience: the president of Mexico, Álvaro Obregón. Subsequently, it opened on 20 screens in Mexico City and over thirty articles were published about it, all praising the performance of Elena Sánchez Valenzuela in the role of the native girl Petrilla. The film critic Fray Candil wrote in El Demócrata on January 7, 1921: “The learning process of this actress in the United States has been very useful for her career. Her progress on the difficult silent art is indisputable, so much so that she is expected to be the first star of the Mexican cinema” (n.p.).

In addition, Sánchez Valenzuela was a well-respected journalist, writing columns and film reviews for Mexico City newspapers El Demócrata in the 1920s and El Día during the 1930s. Following in the footsteps of her father, Abraham Sánchez Arce, she was a journalist who opposed the oppressive regime of Porfirio Díaz in the years before the Mexican Revolution.

