Enid Lorimer was born in London in 1887 as Enid Bosworth Nunn. She eventually became an Australian citizen, however, and died in Sydney on July 15, 1982, a month after she received a Medal of the Order of Australia for the Performing Arts. Lorimer was a theatre actress almost all her life, but also participated in many radio plays and television series in both Britain and Australia. Much less is known about her involvement as a scenarist in the early British film industry. As a result only one confirmed writing credit exists for Lorimer. Although Lorimer was asked about her involvement in early film as part of an interview for the Australia Film Council On Stage! series in 1979, by that time she was ninety-one and not surprisingly did not recall the full details. Another factor in our limited knowledge of Lorimer’s early film career is the lack of attributed credits for early British films. Few extant film prints survive, and as a rule, the trade press did not mention either scenarists or other production staff (Wolstencroft 2009).

Lorimer was born into an upper-middle class family from London. After she graduated, former teacher Elsie Fogerty persuaded Lorimer’s parents to let her participate in Fogerty’s drama classes at the Royal Albert Hall in 1911. In 1912, with Fogerty’s help, Lorimer joined the theatre company of Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree, and this is when Enid adopted “Lorimer” as a stage name. She took mainly understudy parts, reading for Phyllis Neilson-Terry, for example. Lorimer acted at several companies, including Sir Laurence Irving’s, where she met fellow actor Wentworth Zerffi, whom she married in July 1912. By 1914, Lorimer even had her own repertory company in Manchester, but with the outbreak of World War I and Zerffi enlisting, everything changed.

It was at this moment in late 1914 that Lorimer was probably first contracted to a film company as an actress. But since, in her words, “I was tall, and at that time what was wanted were little fluffy types,” she ended up working “more or less as general dogsbody, writing them, which meant of course writing the subtitles which was all that writing consisted of.” This sounds very modest, but later in the 1979 Stage Series interview Lorimer speaks of “my office,” which was located near the manager’s office. The question is: exactly for whom did she work?

It appears that Lorimer initially worked for the Samuelson Film Company, although we have no evidence of this. In the Australia Film Council’s On Stage! interview, Lorimer mentions Samuelson in connection with anecdotes about films that were actually made by the Ideal Film Company. Ideal, however, did not start making films until late 1915. Nevertheless, Lorimer’s one confirmed scenarist credit was for the Ideal Company. This was Her Greatest Performance (1916), which she cowrote with Benedict James. James was a regular writer for Ideal and often teamed up with actor-director Fred Paul until they both left Ideal in late 1917. Interestingly, Paul acted for Samuelson and directed his first film, The Dop Doctor (1916), for them before he joined the new Ideal Company. Lorimer remembers Samuelson as having “the first ever studio at Elstree” while they in fact had their studios at Worton Hall, Isleworth. Ideal, in contrast, did not have its own studios and started filming at Worton Hall at the beginning of 1916, before moving on to Elstree at the end of that year and staying until 1917. All this suggests that Lorimer probably first worked for Samuelson at Worton Hall and then moved with Ideal to Elstree and possibly with director Fred Paul (Low 89, 92-93; Burrows 192, 196-187, 218).

