In June of 1937, Los Angeles Times writer Alma Whitaker told a heartwarming anecdote in her regular society column. Eve Unsell, Hollywood dramatist, she wrote, had “been adopted by” a motherless seal pup camped out on the beach near her Malibu home. Although the pup had already been rescued, nursed back to health, and released back into the ocean by the volunteers at Los Flores Inn, the seal had not returned to sea. When Unsell started to feed the animal every day, the pup somehow crossed the highway from the beach to the former screenwriter’s front door. “Eve now understands what is expected of her,” teased Whitaker (D7).

Lantern slide, Siberia (1926), Eve Unsell (w). Courtesy of the Cleveland Public Library Digital Gallery, W. Ward Marsh collection.

While Whitaker’s sketch depicts Eve Unsell as someone everyone knew, by the late 1930s her career was waning, and such articles, or any news items about her, for that matter, were rare. Sadly, this was the last news item, and it appeared less than one month before the writer’s unexpected and unexplained death. We know only that her death certificate indicates that the cause of death was “general peritonitis” following an operation on June 26, 1937. Yet this information does not begin to explain who she was or even why she was worthy of mention in the society pages and trade magazines, let alone the Los Angeles Times. Unsell’s death also brings something else curious to our attention by her death—the fluctuation of her date of birth. Her obituary in the Los Angeles Times gives her age as fifty years old, which means that she would have been born in 1887, and perhaps following the obituary, Doyle and Slide’s Necrology also list the year of her birth as 1887 (1999, 267).

However, the 1930 US Census lists Unsell’s age as thirty-eight, which would make her year of birth 1892 not 1887. While Unsell would not have been the first person working in the entertainment industry to subtract five years from her age, we wonder about the difference between fudging for publicity and for the census, also the source of the information that Unsell was born in Chicago, Illinois. We learn from a 1919 profile of their illustrious former citizen in the Topeka Daily Capital that Unsell was raised in Caldwell, Kansas, and attended Christian College in Columbia, Missouri, after being expelled from Hardin College for lighting a firecracker in the school chapel (n.p.). Earlier in her career, in 1913, Moving Picture World supplied the information that she received training as a journalist and magazine writer while working for the Kansas City Post. She toured Europe with her parents for two years then started postgraduate study in literature and drama at Boston’s Emerson College (1427).

