Marvin Breckinridge was an amateur filmmaker, best known for her 1930 silent film The Forgotten Frontier. This film presents the activities of the Frontier Nursing Service, a group (primarily women) that provided medical services in remote and rural areas of Kentucky. While the film was named to the National Film Registry in 1996, its position as an amateur production, a late silent film, and documentary made outside of commercial production and distribution networks compound its marginality. Despite having a place on the Film Registry, Breckinridge and her films have received little scholarly attention. This neglect cannot be ascribed to a shortage of documentation about her work; archival and historical sources of information about Breckinridge’s life and filmmaking are plentiful. She took meticulous notes during the production of her completed films, and along with her published memoir, these offer us unique access to Brickinridge’s filmmaking activities.

Grandchild of Vice President John Cabell Breckinridge on one side of her family, and the industrialist B.F. Goodrich on the other, Breckinridge was a member of the New York aristocratic class. She was also, in many respects, a “New Woman” of the 1920s and 1930s who sought out advanced education, socially committed work, and a career as a photographer and journalist. Her films reinforce this attitude, focusing on women in professional roles  (frontier nurses) and higher education (university students and professors). Breckinridge became interested in journalism and international affairs while a student at Vassar College. She participated in the 1925 International Conference of Students in Copenhagen, and was on the founding Executive Committee of the National Student Federation of America. Breckinridge contemplated a transfer to the Columbia School of Journalism, but ultimately graduated from Vassar in 1927. Her appetite for adventure is evident in her extensive travels and training as a pilot. However, Breckinridge’s privileged social position meant that she never completely relied on working for an income.

According to a 1977 speech that she gave about her film She Goes to Vassar (1931), Breckinridge received a 16mm camera for Christmas in 1926 (when she was twenty-one years old, and a Vassar undergraduate), but was already an experienced still photographer, having taken stills since age nine, and developed her own photographs since age fifteen (1). Her home movies, held at the Library of Congress, included footage of Vassar that winter and other travel and holiday films. After her graduation from Vassar in 1927, Breckinridge worked for a period for her cousin Mary Breckinridge’s Frontier Nursing Service in Kentucky. This would eventually lead to her production of The Forgotten Frontier in 1929-1930. To make this film, Breckinridge sought out an education in filmmaking via the amateur film world, and the New York-based Amateur Cinema League (ACL) in particular. Her production notebook for The Forgotten Frontier, archived at the Library of Congress, includes a diary that chronicles Breckinridge’s training in camera operation and cinematography in the fall of 1929. Her instructor in this was ACL technical consultant, and Movie Makers magazine contributor, Russell Holslag. Breckinridge also became involved with amateur film culture, joining the Metropolitan Movie Club of New York and, according to an article entitled “Vacation Films” in Movie Makers, presented footage of a trip to Mexico at a club meeting in 1930 (1930, 444). Movie clubs provided filmmakers with a venue for gaining technical skills and receiving advice about their current projects. During the 1930s, Breckinridge herself contributed an article and several photographs to the ACL’s Movie Makers magazine, and her activities as a filmmaker and member of the organization were also frequently noted.

Marvin Breckinridge at work, circa 1930. Courtesy of the Library of Congress. 

