Flora Finch, like many actresses from the period, tried to capitalize on her fame by starting her own self-titled film production company. Although Flora Finch’s name, as well as her thin, angular face and body, is commonly linked with that of comedian John Bunny, she enjoyed a long and distinguished acting career in her own right, one that went beyond her “skinny” role in the “fatty and skinny” film comedy team of Bunny-and-Finch.  

Flora Finch. Courtesy of the New York Public Library. 

Born in Surrey, England, Finch initially pursued a stage career with the Sir Philip Ben Greet Shakespearean Players until 1907. Newspaper reports claim she immigrated to the United States in 1908, working first with the Biograph Company before moving to the Vitagraph Company in 1909. However, Finch’s obituaries suggest a confusion of dates, stating that Finch began her screen career in 1910. An article Finch wrote for Movie Weekly adds to the confusion, for here she says that “it was in 1910, to the best of my knowledge, that I peeped into a motion picture studio for the first time… which was the old Biograph studio on East 14th Street” (10). In fact, she appeared on screen in at least seven Griffith Biograph shorts before 1910, including Those Awful Hats (1909), where she plays a film spectator who is lifted out of her seat by a crane-like device in order to prevent her enormous hat from blocking the screen—a not-so-subtle way of warning female spectators to remove their hats during film showings. While in her Movie Weekly article Finch claims that her earliest on-screen appearance was in a “Jones Family” film that required she “discuss with poker-spined primness the question of prohibition,” Finch receives her first official credit for the 1908 Griffith film, The Helping Hand (10).

After leaving Biograph in 1909, Finch began work at the Vitagraph studios in Brooklyn, New York, where she made The New Stenographer (1911), her first motion picture with John Bunny. Finch’s work in that film resulted in a five-year contract with Vitagraph, during which she starred with Bunny in a series of extremely popular marital situation farces (Finch 11). Finch claims that while at Vitagraph, she and Bunny “turned out a one-reel picture a week” and “produced close on to three hundred comedies” (11). Described as the screen’s “original Ugly Duckling,” Finch’s harsh, bony features and rail-thin frame delighted audiences in more than two hundred and sixty films, and her style of slapstick, with its frequent incorporation of unique stunts, became a prototype that later comediennes would emulate. For example, Mabel Normand claimed that Finch was instrumental in the development of Normand’s own intricate comedic style, claiming that “every fiber in my body responded to Flora Finch’s celebrated comedies; and though I was quite unconscious of it, I can see now that I was always wondering how I would do the funny little stunts she did in her pictures” (qtd. in Sherman 327). When John Bunny succumbed to Bright’s disease on April 26, 1915, Finch’s career also seemed to come to a premature end, and so rare were her screen appearances around 1915 that most newspapers claimed that Finch had retired.

