Christiane Mendelys’ career as a mime, actress, film critic, and acting teacher mirrored the major developments in French cinema culture, from the early days of cinema as a music-hall attraction, through the first attempts at “theatrical cinema” for middle-class audiences in the mid-1900s and the emergence of newspaper film criticism in the mid-1910s, to, finally, the height of cinema popularity in 1920s Paris. However, unlike fellow critics such as Louis Delluc, Émile Vuillermoz, and Léon Moussinac, her contribution to the development of cinema culture in France has been all but overlooked. While their work circulates in edited volumes, accessing the film criticism of Mendelys requires entering the ornate corridors of the Palais Garnier Opera House, where newspaper clippings of her writings are archived.

Poster for “Les Cantomimes” (1899), drawn by Charles Léandre. Courtesy of the Bibliothèque Municipale de Lyon.

Pantomime was enjoying a revival in Paris when in the late 1890s the young Mendelys met Georges Wague while studying mime at the Paris Conservatoire under Félicia Mallet. In 1900 countless curious tourists flocked to Paris for the Exposition Universelle, and, according to Le Petit Journal, many of them saw the two perform pantomime at the Roulotte theatre (1933, 6), a show where they shared the stage with the cinématographe (Picard 231). By the mid-1900s, Mendelys was already a renowned mime and recognizable member of the vie parisienne, performing in the belle époque salons of aristocrats alongside her good friend Colette as well as in several theaters. According to reviews in daily press outlets such as Le Matin, La Justice, La Lanterne, Gil Blas, and Le Petit Parisien, by 1907 Mendelys had performed at the Théâtre des Mathurins, the Bodinière, the Gaîté-Montparnasse, the Théâtre des Capucines, the Théâtre d’Antin, the Théâtre Mondain, the Théâtre Rabelais, the Eiffel Tower theatre, the théâtre Grévin, the Grand Guignol, the Théâtre des Bouffes-Parisiens, and the Théâtre de Montrouge. Her nom de ville, Christiane Wague, regularly appears in newspapers on the guest lists for Parisian theatrical events and society fundraisers. According to two separate January 1907 articles in Journal officiel de la république française and Le Temps, her success as a performer was such that that year the French Minister of Public Instruction awarded her the title of officier de l’instruction publique in recognition of her services to the arts (551; 3).

Portrait of Christiane Mendelys by Charles Léandre. Courtesy of the Bibliothèque Nationale de France.

