Florence Annie Bridgwood, usually known as “Flo” Lawrence, was born in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, on January 2, 1886. Her mother, Charlotte Bridgwood, was a stage actress known professionally as Lotta Lawrence, and was the manager and leading lady of the Lawrence Dramatic Company (Holland 386). Flo’s childhood, consequently, was spent on the touring road and on the theatrical stage. She began her career in the motion picture industry with a role in an Edison Company short, Daniel Boone/Pioneer Days in America (1907), an account of which is given in her autobiography, Growing Up with the Movies, serialized by Photoplay in four parts. Both mother and daughter appeared in Daniel Boone as well as in Vitagraph’s adaptation of Irish playwright Dion Boucicault’s 1874 theatrical melodrama as The Shaughraun, an Irish Romance (1907), but Lotta soon returned to the stage. Flo’s motion picture career, in contrast, had just begun.

Florence Lawrence. Courtesy of the Wisconsin Center for Film and Television.

Lawrence found her next job at the Vitagraph Company of America, where she worked with the company cofounder J. Stuart Blackton and with the stage actor-turned-director Charles Kent (Brown 14–16). At the American Mutoscope and Biograph Company, Lawrence appeared in most of the sixty short motion pictures that D.W. Griffith directed in 1908, his second year with the company (Holland 389). Lawrence became well known for her role in the Mr. and Mrs. Jones comedy shorts, and as her effect on audiences became measurable, she set herself apart by insisting on weekly and not daily wages, twice the normal salary, and her own makeup table, according to Karen Mahar (2006, 63). As many sources tell us, Florence Lawrence became famous, but not under her own name; rather, following the Biograph policy of player anonymity, she was known as “the Biograph girl.” The actor’s transition from anonymity to picture personality to the status of star is crucial to understanding the economics of the silent era, and although Florence Lawrence is a pivotal figure, important contemporary accounts demonstrate that she is not the entire story (deCordova 1990; Staiger 1985, 101; Slide 1978, 1).

Lawrence does, however, exemplify the important principle that public recognition of actors made it possible for popular players to begin to pressure early motion picture companies, but not all were willing to change the policy of actor anonymity. Due to her growing demands on the Biograph management—quite possibly encouraged by her then husband, Harry Solter—both Lawrence and Solter were fired in 1910 (Mahar 2006, 63). They were soon hired, however, by producer Carl Laemmle, who had just started the Independent Motion Picture Company, better known as IMP, and where Lawrence was the object of a notorious publicity stunt. Her “death” in a streetcar accident was widely announced, followed by her resurrection in the first publicity tour in film history, in St. Louis on March 25, 1910, a detailed account of which can be found in Brown (47-58). The stunt, which involved IMP’s circulation of the false news as well as the false “exposure” of their own story in the famous Moving Picture World “We Nail a Lie” advertisement, has been reconsidered in recent years by Eileen Bowser, who challenges Terry Ramsaye’s earlier account (Ramsaye 1986, 523-524). Bowser argues for seeing a gradual buildup rather than a single publicity coup as instrumental in making Florence Lawrence a “star” actress.

