Frederica Maas first contacted the Women Film Pioneers Project in the late 1990s. She had just completed her autobiography, The Shocking Miss Pilgrim: A Writer in Early Hollywood, which chronicles the vicissitudes of her career from the silent period into the sound era. In the course of a remarkably frank narrative, she offers various explanations for her professional disappointments. These include bad luck, bad decisions, and bad timing; however, it is finally the assignment of screen credits that had the most lasting impact. Maas tells us that “writers in those days had little redress. The Writers Guild was new and not powerful… [T]he last writer to be hired to do a re-write got the credit… [I]t wasn’t right and it wasn’t fair, but that was how Hollywood operated” (67).

For writers, the assignment or non-assignment of screen credits can seriously affect one’s livelihood; for film scholars, it muddies the question of how we determine the accomplishments of a single individual in what is essentially a collaborative business and art. In Maas’s telling, she once received sole credit for Dance Madness (1926), a film on which she did little work; she was not credited for the early Norma Shearer films that she says she wrote; and she was belatedly given shared credit for The Waning Sex (1926), although this is not reflected in the American Film Institute catalog.

Frederica Sagor Maas portrait by Walter Frederick Seely, 1925.

Maas was born Frederica Alexandrina Sagor on the Lower East Side of Manhattan to Russian immigrant parents. She enrolled at Columbia University in 1917 to study journalism and worked as a copy girl at the Evening Globe for two summers. In 1919, she took a job as assistant to the story editor at Universal in New York, and was promoted to story editor in 1923. A year later, she set off for Los Angeles to try her luck as a screenwriter. There, she wrote the screenplay for The Plastic Age (1925) based on a novel that she had acquired while at Universal, only to have it rejected by Carl Laemmle for being too “dirty” (46). The screenplay was subsequently bought and produced by her friend and former colleague, B. P. Schulberg. Emerging actress Clara Bow was cast, and the film’s success allowed Maas to secure a three-year contract with MGM starting at $350/week.

