Born in 1903 as Peng Jianqing, Helen Wang was raised in a traditional scholarly family within a confined compound in Wuhu, Anhui Province. She was the only girl and her parents’ favorite. At thirteen, her father moved the entire family to Shanghai so she could attend St. Mary Girl’s School. While there, she learned English, read Western literature, enjoyed music, and adopted the English name of Helen (Shen 56). Before she graduated, both her parents passed away, leaving her in the care of her eldest brother, who soon married her off to a man working for a Sino-Japanese mine in Fengtian (now Shenyang) that was more than a thousand miles away from Shanghai. Sixteen-year-old Helen bore her husband’s debauchery and anti-Chinese deference to his Japanese employers for a brief time before returning to Shanghai to try to make her own life. Since her brother was unwilling to take her back in, she took up residence with her godmother and managed to secure a job as a typist in a company under British American Tobacco (S. Zhang 404).

Helen Wang (seated), Orphan Rescues Grandfather/孤兒救祖記 (1923). Private Collection.

Helen Wang, Orphan Rescues Grandfather/孤兒救祖記 (1923). Private Collection.

Helen’s personal engagement with film began when she visited the set of Laborer’s Love (1922) with a friend to see how a film was made. While she observed the awkward performance of a first-time actress, director Zhang Shichuan was impressed with her modern fashion sense and elegant manners (S. Zhang 404). This father figure of Shanghai cinema had, until then, only worked with stage actors from the lower class. He felt that Helen exuded the air of a young mistress from a wealthy family, which made her perfect for the female lead in his then upcoming film, Orphan Rescues Grandfather (1923). As a novice in the film industry, Helen abandoned her original name of Jianqing Peng and took the new name of Hanlun Wang: while Hanlun was in fact the Chinese pronunciation of Helen, “Wang” was a surname she picked because this Chinese character resembled the pattern on a tiger’s forehead (H. Wang 1962, 51). In her very first acting job, she was fortunate enough to work with renowned dramatist Zheng Zhengqiu, in a role that positively portrayed “a new domestic subject, a self-assertive woman who [is] economically independent and taking the responsibility of educating the younger generation” (Chen 31).

