Gladys Rosson was Cecil B. DeMille’s secretary for thirty-nine years, starting the summer she graduated high school in 1914 until her death in 1953 (DeMille and Hayne 1959, 95). She was also his mistress, part of his “harem,” or, as DeMille’s niece Agnes, calls it, his “seraglio”—the members of which vary according to sources (Agnes deMille 1990, 183). Regardless, she was intimately involved in DeMille’s work, ranging from the production of his films to the investment of his finances to the management of his image. If ever there was a woman behind the man, Gladys was she.

Gladys was with DeMille throughout the course of his career. According to her Los Angeles Times obituary, she started out as the first secretary employed by the Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Company, then she and Florence Cole were the only secretaries kept by DeMille during his shift from Paramount in the early thirties (A9; Higham 1973, 215). At the time of her death, her title was secretary-treasurer of Cecil B. DeMille Productions (A9).

Gladys Rosson at her desk. Courtesy of Brigham Young University. 

Dividing her time between the studio bungalow, the company offices in Laughlin Park, the DeMille mansion, the yacht, and Paradise Ranch, where Cecil spent most weekends, Gladys Rosson accompanied DeMille everywhere, wherever he needed her. According to a 1920 Photoplay interview, he “in eighteen years… has never passed a Saturday night at home,” never saying “what I was doing, nor whom I was with” (St. Johns 30). On set she acted as a stand-in for Geraldine Farrar in Joan the Woman (1916) since the flames at the stake were too hot for the star and Gladys had a similar complexion and hair color as Farrar (DeMille and Hayne 1985, 174). At the studio she responded to letters, speaking on behalf of DeMille, and copied longhand the script for Old Wives for New (1918) after a successful screening of the completed film in Los Angeles, just so she could send it to her sister in New York to see what Adolph Zukor’s pet scenario department would say (DeMille and Hayne 1985, 214). New York disdained DeMille productions, which seldom enjoyed favorable East Coast critical reception, and Zukor’s department sent back the transcribed script as unsuitable for pictures. As a typist, she was also indispensable to creative personnel. On the Seaward, DeMille’s yacht, Gladys accompanied writers in order to type up their work, but not always with a paperweight—she lost The King of Kings (1927) to the wind. But clearly Rosson operated on multiple levels—maid, typist, researcher, executive producer, accountant. According to Phil Koury’s biography of DeMille, his secretary not only went on location scouts with DeMille, but also appointed the members of the staff who would accompany them (36). Preparing for The Greatest Show on Earth (1952), she took 135 pages of notes documenting circus life as she traveled around with DeMille and the Ringling Bros. & Barnum and Bailey Circus (DeMille and Hayne 1985, 404). Koury writes that on trips Gladys even picked out DeMille’s outfit the night before—the director known for his puttees, boots, and breeches (36). Unaccompanied, too, she traveled; a document from the DeMille archive details her itinerary for a trip from Los Angeles to New York to many locations around the Caribbean and South America, presumably scouting for locations (BYU, box 307, fldr. 10).

