Gloria Swanson portrait. Private Collection. 

Swanson had been a star since late 1919, when she signed a seven-year contract at Famous Players-Lasky in a series of films directed by Cecil B. DeMille. But by the mid-1920s, as Swanson admits in her autobiography, she was beginning to feel very unsatisfied at Famous Players-Lasky. Churning out four to six films a year was exhausting, and while Swanson was the most successful actress in America (save perhaps Mary Pickford), by the mid-1920s her films were famous more for her fabulous costumes than for her acting or the story line (273).

In 1925 Swanson fought to make the film Madame Sans-Gêne. It broke many conventions, and, according to Harry Waldman’s book about American filmmakers working abroad, Swanson personally went to the French government with her request and managed to do what no other company (not even Ufa) had done: gaining permission to shoot in historic French sites. It was the first French-American coproduction in which both countries had a hand in the film’s development. Swanson was deeply involved in every aspect of the production, including having a say in who directed and who was cast (111). Swanson also met and fell in love with Henri, the Marquis de la Falaise de la Coudraye, who worked as her translator. She was, however, still married to her second husband, Herbert Somborn. While she and Somborn were estranged and in the process of getting divorced, she realized she was pregnant with the marquis’s baby. She and Henri planned to marry once the divorce was final; however, it would be clear that the baby was not Somborn’s and that she had committed adultery. Swanson’s contract at Famous Players-Lasky included a morality clause, and she knew her contract could be canceled and she could be banned from working at any other studio if this morality clause were broken. In the late 1950s, when she gave an oral history to Columbia University, Swanson claimed that her reasons for leaving Famous Players-Lasky were extremely personal and that she would never disclose them. But by 1980, when she published her memoir titled Swanson on Swanson, she was prepared to discuss the issue.

Gloria Swanson. Courtesy of the Library of Congress.

