Marija Jurić Zagorka. 

Marija Jurić Zagorka was one of the most important feminist figures in the history of Croatia and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Marija Jurić, who later added the pen name Zagorka, was born to a well-to-do Croatian family in 1873. During this historical period, women were not provided with the same educational opportunities as men. Despite this, Zagorka received a solid private education due to her family’s upper class status. In 1891, as a reaction to her expressing desire to become an actress, Zagorka’s parents arranged for her to marry a Hungarian man whom she did not know. After three years of marriage, which, according to Dragutin Prohaska, Zagorka likened to being “subjected to a moral inquisition” (qtd. in Jakobović Fribec 2006, 196), she fled from her husband, eventually settling in Zagreb. In Croatia’s capital, she started her pioneering journalistic career, becoming the first female journalist in the country and in the region of South East Europe more broadly. Her first journalistic piece was published in 1896 in Obzor, at the time the most esteemed Croatian daily. She was a political journalist, but was often not allowed to publish under her real name. Obzor’s editor-in-chief famously referred to her as “a crone with no name or reputation, a cowgirl from Zagorje and, what’s more, infected with a socialist mentality and feminist notions” (Lasić 1986, 69). Moreover, she was made to work in a separate room behind a curtain out of fear that a woman’s presence would scandalize the visitors of the newspaper’s offices.

Stills from The Grič Witch (1920). Courtesy of the Croatian State Archives.

Zagorka exhibited “a deep sense of social justice and a ‘revolutionary nature’ at an early age” (Jakobović Fribec 195), and such tendencies only grew more prominent in her adult years. She was an outspoken feminist, mobilizing the working women’s political activity and leading the first women’s protest in Zagreb in 1903. She was also the founder of Ženski list/Women’s Paper, Croatia’s first women’s magazine, in 1925. After she left Ženski list, she started another feminist magazine, Hrvatica/Croatian Woman, in 1938. During World War II, under the rule of Croatia’s collaborationist Nazi state (NDH), her assets were confiscated and she was banned from publishing. After the war, she continued her feminist activism, which often earned her ridicule from male colleagues. She died in Zagreb in 1957, and her apartment is today a museum. Subsequent feminist scholarship has largely embraced Zagorka’s populist legacy (Kolanović 2008), with Lydia Sklevicky dubbing her “the tiny Amazonian of Croatian feminism” (1996, 245).

