Helen Gardner’s silent film career peaked three times. The first peak came in 1911 with her performance as Becky Sharp in Vanity Fair (1911), important as an early three-reel film, forerunner of four-reel and longer feature films. A review in the Moving Picture World praised the Vitagraph Company of America for the film’s wonderful fidelity to Thackeray’s novel. The reviewer was thrilled with Gardner’s performance: “We might ramble on for hours in ecstasies over the superb work of Miss Gardner and at the end of that time have given but a faint idea of what we saw her do” (887). When Vanity Fair was released, in December of 1911, Gardner had been with Vitagraph about a year and a half.  

Helen Gardner c. 1911. Courtesy of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Margaret Herrick Library. 

The second peak of Gardner’s career came when she formed her own production company, Helen Gardner Picture Players, which she publicly announced on May 22, 1912, in the New York Dramatic Mirror (27). For a woman, to walk away from success and relative security at Vitagraph in order to attempt an independent way of satisfying her ambitions was a bold and unconventional move. Gardner’s vision too was bold. She was embarking on a moviemaking venture whose stated purpose was to specialize in large feature motion picture productions of five and six reels in length.

Gardner was the first actress to strike out on her own for independent production. Although Marion Leonard and her director husband Stannar E. V. Taylor had left the Biograph Company in 1911 to start the Gem Motion Picture Company, Gardner did it alone. And she was the first to state that her reason for forming her own company was to produce feature films, to which Vitagraph was not yet committed. With her daring move, Gardner was several months ahead of Gene Gauntier, and she predated Lois Weber, who may have left the Universal Film Manufacturing Company in 1914 to go with Bosworth because of a similar desire to move into feature-length motion pictures before Universal was ready (Mahar 2006, 92). As with other star companies begun in this 1912–1913 period (Ethel Grandin, Florence Lawrence, Florence Turner), production as well as promotion was organized around Gardner, who always played the lead.

