The previous lack of even the most basic published information on Ida Jenbach is symptomatic of the long scholarly neglect of Austrian cinema history in and outside the country. With research, restoration, and archival work beginning in the last decade of the twentieth century, much has been reclaimed and often examined for the first time. This includes the rare female artists behind the camera, and the careers of those who perished in the Holocaust. The triple layer of cultural amnesia surrounding the work of screenwriter Ida Jenbach as Austrian film talent, female artist, and Shoah victim is a case in point.

Jenbach, born 1868, either June 4th or 16th, depending upon the source, as Ida Jakobovits in Miskolez, in the former Austria-Hungary, now Hungary. She studied acting at the Vienna Conservatory and gave her stage premiere in Mannheim in 1888, and subsequently found acting work in theatrical productions in Vienna, Munich, Salzburg, and Kronstadt. With the establishment of a film industry in Vienna, Jenbach was employed as the dramaturge for Wiener Kunstfilm or Viennese Art Film, the studio of Austria’s first female film pioneer, Louise Kolm, who, along with Count Sascha Kolowrat, led Viennese film production through World War I and into the mid-1920s. Although Kolm would share or give her husbands—first, director Anton Kolm, then cameraman Jakob Fleck—credit for her screenwriting, editing, direction, and production, leaving her own official film credits inconclusive, her realization as a filmmaker must have been influential on Jenbach. Kolm, with Fleck, directed the film on which Jenbach received one of her first recorded credits as screenwriter, Der Geisel der Menschheit/The Hostage of Mankind (1918). Der Schmuck der Herzogin/The Jewels of the Duchess (1917) followed, which Jenbach cowrote with Edmund Porges, but since no director is credited, we could speculate that it may have been directed by one or both of its writers. Next, just prior to the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, Jenbach wrote what is one of the few German language detective films of the era, Frauenehre/Women’s Honor (1918), directed by Georg Kundert.

Jenbach did her most of her screenwriting for Austrian directors Hans Karl Breslauer and Max Neufeld and helped develop new genres for both of them. She was also a scenarist for Carmen Cartellieri, a leading silent screen star who formed her own production company and created one of the first significant roles for future German-language leading man and film director Willi Forst in Breslauer’s Oh, du lieber Augustin/Oh, Dear Augustin (1922). Strandgut (1924), about a female shipwreck survivor who is rescued and pursued by two brothers, directed by Breslauer and staring Forst, shows Jenbach’s talent in furthering neorealistic melodrama and location-shot productions. The character constellation of a woman caught between the desires of two men, and the equation of the female with dangerous natural forces became a dependable trope in the so-called Bergfilm or mountain film genre of the late 1920s and early 1930s.

Hans Moser in Die Stadte Ohne Juden (1924). Courtesy of the Filmarchiv Austria.

