As a woman who wrote or cowrote over sixty produced films, a producer who championed strong female roles, and a Hollywood insider with a career spanning over three decades, Jane Murfin may be one of the most prolific but least known writers of the 1920s and ’30s.

Jane Murfin was born Jane Macklem in Quincy, Michigan. Her first marriage, in 1907, to lawyer James Murfin, lasted less than five years, but Jane adopted his surname and would use it—excluding the brief period in the late 1910s when she and Jane Cowl used the pseudonym Allan Langdon Martin—throughout her life. Although the 1910 US Census records list her as living as a housewife in Michigan with her lawyer-husband James, according to Murfin family correspondence from 1967, Jane moved shortly after to New York City while her husband remained in Michigan. According to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, James eventually became a school regent, after a long career teaching law, and even has a gate on the grounds named after him.

In 1915, Murfin struck up what would become a lifelong friendship with actress Jane Cowl. In an undated typed letter written by Cowl, she describes Murfin as the best friend any person could hope to have (Cowl Papers, Box 2, Folder 8). The two collaborated on a series of plays in the late teens, including the popular and often revived World War I theatrical melodramas “Lilac Time” (1917) and “Smilin’ Through” (1919). Evidence of their business savvy, the two retained the rights to “Smilin’ Through.” According to a 1931 Los Angeles Times article “exposing” what writers in the industry during the silent era made, Joseph Schenck optioned the play for $22,500 in 1920 as a vehicle for his wife Norma Talmadge (Schallert K7). The two women later resold the dialogue rights to Schenck while retaining the rights for radio and TV adaptations, according to a series of financial documents exchanged between Cowl and her attorney (Cowl Papers, Box 2, Folder 5). Murfin and Cowl’s early Broadway collaborations, which starred Cowl, were credited to “Allan Langdon Martin,” as the two thought Broadway producers would take their work more seriously if they believed a man had written it. Though this ruse may have initially helped to get “Lilac Time” produced in 1917, they later regretted their scheme as the play continued to be credited to the nonexistent “Martin” long after Cowl and Murfin had gained fame as dramatists, which is clear from Jane Cowl’s correspondence with her attorney (Cowl Papers, Box 2 Folder 5).

Murfin’s first motion picture scenario, Marie, Ltd., was written and produced in 1919 by Adolph Zukor’s Select Pictures Corporation in New York. Shortly after, Murfin relocated to California and made the transition from writing plays to writing primarily for film. She wrote scenarios for a number of films during the mid-1920s, primarily romantic comedies and a few dramas. In 1924, she wrote, codirected, and coproduced Flapper Wives, a May Allison drama about faith healing adapted from an unproduced Murfin and Cowl play called “The Flaming Sign.” But her biggest success in the 1920s was writing scenarios for her dog, Strongheart.

