Jeanie Macpherson imagines a scenario. Courtesy of Brigham Young University. 

Jeanie Macpherson is best known as Cecil B. DeMille’s screenwriter since she collaborated exclusively with the director-producer from 1915 through the silent era and into the sound era, in a working relationship lasting fifteen years. Like many other women who became established as screenwriters, she began her career as a performer, first as a dancer and then as an actress. Her numerous acting screen credits begin in 1908, and nearly thirty of the short films she appeared in for the Biograph Company, most directed by D. W. Griffith, are extant. At Universal Pictures, Macpherson began to write, but due to a fluke she also directed the one film that she wrote there—a one-reel Western, The Tarantula (1913), according to a 1916 Photoplay article (95). Although Anthony Slide cannot confirm the success of the film, both he and Charles Higham retell the story that when the film negative was destroyed by accident, the actress was asked to reshoot the entire motion picture just as she recalled it since the original director was unavailable (Slide 1977, 60; Higham 1973, 38).

Jeanie Macpherson on the set of Joan The Woman (1917). Courtesy of Brigham Young University.

There are several versions of how Jeanie Macpherson, out of work after The Tarantula, was hired by DeMille at the Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Company. The most elaborate version is from Higham, who describes Macpherson’s attempt to get an acting job as involving a series of battles between the two while the director was shooting Rose of the Rancho (1914) (38–40). The tempestuousness of their relationship is echoed in DeMille’s account of their final breakup at a luncheon thirty years later: “I disagreed with Jeanie rather sharply—she got up and left the table—I said, if you go now you can’t come back” (BYU, Dec. 1953 note, box 15, fldr. 65). Stormy or not, the relationship appears to have been highly productive, if screen credits are any indication. Of the silent films produced and/or directed by DeMille in the 1915–1930 period, Macpherson is given scenario credit on thirty-two (Cherchi Usai and Codelli 1991, 20). Still, the question of DeMille’s relation to Macpherson has continued to color the assessment of her involvement in the silent film industry, where she was on the board of Palmer Photoplay Company and listed as a founder of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

