The Ottoman Empire dissolved after the First World War and was replaced by the self-consciously modern and Westernized Republic of Turkey in 1923. Turkish culture under the Ottoman rule has been characterized by historians as a traditional Islamic culture that experienced very little change for centuries. What change did occur has typically been attributed to Western contact. The Republican state evolved into what later scholars called a feminist state, which made women’s equality in the public sphere a national policy. Indeed, a secular civil code replaced the Islamic law in 1926, giving women equal civil rights. It is in this transitional period that Bedia Muvahhit became a pioneer in cinema.

Within this historical context, the idea of a new Republican woman who represented the modern, secular, Westernized state, and who was expected to behave and dress in what the state defined as a modern, secular, and Western manner, was established. The new regime encouraged women to take on professions that were traditionally perceived as masculine and at times, for religious reasons, were forbidden for women. Acting of Muslim women in cinema was one example of this. However, in the early 1920s, this changed with Muvahhit and Neyyire Neyir’s performances in films as the first Muslim actresses. The state reforms of this period represented the vision of a single charismatic leader, the founder of the Republic, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. Muvahhit recalled the story of her meeting with Atatürk and the beginning of her acting career, a turning point in Turkish cultural history, in a fascinating 1988 interview on Turkish Radio Television 2:

It is one of Atatürk’s biggest reforms for the Turkish woman to get rid of her veil and go on stage to act. Ms. Halide Edip wanted her novel to be adapted into a film and a Turkish woman to act in it. Mr. Muhsin [Ertuğrul], a friend of my husband, who directed the film invited me to act. […] My husband and his fellow actors invited Atatürk to İzmir to see their play. İzmir, at the time, was only just freed from Greek occupation. It was a city literally covered in ashes and fire. Atatürk asked who the actors in the play were. There was Ms. Isabelle, Ms. Maria, etc. [all non-Turkish names]. Then he enquired if there were any Turkish actresses. Before that a Turkish woman, called Afife Jale, tried acting in another play, but the police arrested her as she was on stage and took her away and put her in custody, and the play got cancelled. […] Atatürk asked Mr. Muvahhit why I did not act, as he had seen me in the film Ateşten Gömlek and was very impressed with my performance. […] They told me I would be acting that evening. […] Given that it was Atatürk’s order, I happily memorized all the lines during the day and performed that evening as the Principal in the play “Ceza Kanunu.” After the play, Atatürk thanked me [and] asked me to cover my head with a modest headscarf. I asked him why. He responded: “We need to get the nation used to it slowly rather than attracting negative attention. You acting on stage is in itself a big step forward.”

Although Muvahhit’s account above is particularly significant in the context of theatre, it is important to note that her visibility in film allowed her to ultimately break barriers in the theatrical world.

