Growing up in Glasgow in the early part of the 20th century, Jenny Brown should have had a conventional upper-middle-class future, attending parties and balls, marrying a man from a “suitable” family, and living an easy life as a respectable Glaswegian society matron. But this was not at all the life Jenny Brown, later Jenny Gilbertson, was to carve out for herself. Her mother wanted her, Gilbertson told Ann Black, to “stay home, drive the car, play golf and dust the legs of the dining room table” (2010). Against her family’s wishes, she attended the University of Glasgow, where she received her MA, followed by training as a teacher. Wanting to expand her horizons, she traveled to London to study journalism, and while she was there, an event occurred that would change her life. She attended a screening of an amateur film about Loch Lomond and, with a typical burst of enthusiasm, decided that filmmaking was to be the career for her. Acquiring a 16mm Cine-Kodak camera, she taught herself the fundamentals of cinematography while shooting footage of scampering squirrels in Kensington Gardens and barges on the River Thames.

As a schoolgirl, Jenny Brown had accompanied her parents on holidays in Europe and in the remote Shetland Isles, the most northerly area of Great Britain, where her parents rented a house in Hillswick near the dramatically rugged sea cliffs that would feature so prominently in her later motion picture work. Enamored with the area and energized by her spirit of adventure, she returned in 1931, this time bringing her camera with her, determined to record the landscape and people to which she was so irresistibly drawn. The first film she made there was the 56-minute documentary A Crofter’s Life in Shetland (1931), a cyclical film portraying a year in the life of the island people, which she wrote, shot, and single-handedly edited. The film reveals Brown’s keen interest in the daily lives of the inhabitants and her ability to establish an intimate rapport with her subject matter.

A Crofter’s Life in Shetland (1931). Courtesy of the National Library of Scotland.

The life of the country people she found on Shetland was historically and geographically far removed from the life she had led in Glasgow, but, although she arrived as an outsider, Brown quickly won the hearts of the islanders. Working as a one-women film crew, she covered events from one end of the islands to the other, from the isolated landscapes of the crofts to the relatively bustling center of the capital town of Lerwick, from the south at Sunburgh to Britain’s most northerly lighthouse, Muckle Flugga. The islanders seemed hardly aware of her presence, and her unobtrusive, early observational style allowed them to carry out their daily activities in a natural and unselfconscious way, whether digging peat, rooing sheep and knitting their wool, planting potatoes, or fishing at sea.

