Feminist activist Juliet Barrett Rublee worked with Margaret Sanger in the US birth control movement and also produced perhaps the first US feature motion picture made entirely in Mexico—Flame of Mexico (1932), also known as The Soul of Mexico, The Heart of Mexico and Alma Mexicana. Made at the dawn of the sound era, Flame of Mexico was silent with a musical score. It is an unusual film that began with Rublee’s aspirations to make a travelogue, but ended up a historical melodrama, and thus in the extant print we see the conventions of both at work. For the most part, Rublee and Flame have been left out of written histories of film although both are mentioned briefly in Aurelio de los Reyes’s Filmografía del cine mudo mexicano and in Rangel and Portas’s Enciclopedia Cinematográfica Mexicana. Yet both are central to understanding the conditions under which a distinctive alternative visual discourse on Mexico became available to American as well as Mexican viewers.

Mrs. Juliet Barrett Rublee as Grand Marshal of the procession organized by the Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage. Courtesy of the Library of Congress.

Rublee was an avid traveler prior to shooting Flame of Mexico. She visited various locations in Mexico accompanied by Captain John Noel, known in the United States for his lectures as well as for having photographed George Mallory’s fatal 1924 expedition to Mount Everest. Over the course of two and a half months, Rublee and Noel shot fifteen thousand feet of panoramic views. Some of this initial travelogue footage appears in Flame of Mexico. In an unsigned typescript titled “ Mexico City, Dec.,” most likely written by Rublee herself in December 1929, the goal of Flame of Mexico is stated as: “to show the world the real Mexico.” However, because travelogues, shown to small audiences in lecture halls, were considered educational but not entertaining, Rublee instead created a fictional narrative that could engage a wider audience, a strategy that increased her chances of recovering the $150,000 personal investment she made in the film, referenced in the New York World-Telegram review (n.p.).

Frame enlargement, Juliet Barrett Rublee home movie.

