Lenore Coffee was a screenwriter in Hollywood from the late silent period through the end of the studio system. Although she wrote original stories, titles, and scenarios and was known for her adaptations of popular women’s fiction, she specialized in repairing the work of others. As a writer called upon to correct and reformulate the work of such well-known figures as Cecil B. DeMille and Irving Thalberg, her often unacknowledged and remarkably long-lived voice is worth examining more closely.

Lenore Coffee with baby. Private Collection.

Information about Coffee comes largely from a Patrick McGilligan’s interview, carried out at the end of her life, and Storyline, her own detailed memoir of the silent period. Coffee grew up in San Francisco and began her career in 1919, after responding successfully to a Garson Studio advertisement in the Motion Pictures Exchange Herald for a story for the actress Clara Kimball Young, which was produced as The Better Wife (1919). After selling her first scenario to the first producer who saw it and moving to Hollywood in 1919, Coffee worked for Louis B. Mayer for a short time before beginning her actual employment with director-producer Harry Garson, for whom she was, at one time, as she tells us in Storyline, “the only girl assistant director in the business” (55). For Mayer, Coffee’s first job was to tell and to sell the producer’s favorite stories to potential actors; for Garson, Coffee also performed the duties of what was later called a continuity girl, reading manuscripts, making cutting notes, and writing titles (Coffee 1973, 17–18). Although Coffee had been offered a job “tightening and editing and titling” by Irving Thalberg when he was first brought to Hollywood by Carl Laemmle to work at Universal, she preferred working with writers rather than producers, she says in her interview with McGilligan (140). Coffee spent two years working with the playwright Bayard Veiller at Metro, considering it her apprenticeship as a dramatic writer. While working on DeMille’s The Volga Boatman in 1924, she married the British novelist and director William Joyce Cowen, whose surname she sometimes used.

Lantern slide, The Volga Boatman (1926), Lenore Coffee (w). Courtesy of the Cleveland Public Library Digital Gallery, W. Ward Marsh collection.

