Born Lulu Case in rural South Dakota, Lillian Case Russell worked as a schoolteacher before beginning her writing career in New York shortly after the turn of the century. Living in Brooklyn with her husband John L. Russell (who would later become known in Western films as John Lowell) and their two children, Russell wrote stories and poetry for newspapers and magazines. Covering topics ranging from Reno divorces to men’s fashions to women’s suffrage, Russell’s early writing demonstrated the wit, flair for the dramatic, and social awareness that would inform many of her later screenplays. This is evident in the 1912 New York Times piece “You Mustn’t Ask to Vote,” in which she offers a biting criticism of anti-suffrage attitudes: “You may toil behind our counters, / In our factories you may slave, / You are welcome in the sweatshop / From the cradle to the grave; / If you err, altho’ a woman, / You may dangle by the throat, / But our chivalry is outraged / If you soil your hands to vote” (10).

After several years writing for newspapers and magazines, Russell began her screenwriting career in the mid-1910s. She wrote films in a wide range of genres and featuring a variety of personalities, from former Ziegfeld girl Dorothy Mackaill (The Broken Violin, 1923) to baseball star Ty Cobb (Somewhere in Georgia, 1916). Her comedies for Mr. and Mrs. Sidney Drew include an adaptation of the play “Cousin Kate” directed by Mrs. Sidney Drew (Lucille McVey) in 1921. Russell also wrote several feature melodramas for Olga Petrova between 1916 and 1918 in which Petrova played daring, adventurous women who moved freely in masculine spaces. In The Black Butterfly (1916), Petrova stars as a nurse who undergoes a blood transfusion on the front lines in France to save her beloved; in The Soul of a Magdalene (1917), Petrova portrays an expert in foreign languages; and in The Light Within (1918) she plays a doctor, but, as Variety pointed out, “Not an ordinary two-dollar-a-visit physician, but a doctor of bacteriology who discovers a cure for meningitis, and later for the deadly anthrax” (52).

Olga Petrova in The Light Within (1918), written by Lillian Case Russell. Private Collection.

By the late-1910s Russell was the chief screenwriter for Blazed Trail Productions, an independent company based in Upstate New York and specializing in Westerns. The company’s primary star was John Lowell, and Russell’s daughter Evangeline Russell was a frequent costar, often playing the romantic lead opposite her father. In 1920, Moving Picture World reported that Lillian Case Russell would be directing films for Blazed Trail Productions after the company’s previous director, Joseph J. Barry, left to form his own production company. These films, featuring stories about the Northwest Mounted Police, were described by the Moving Picture World as “full of action,” and said to have “met with a splendid reception” (1058).

