Despite subheadings that highlight Madeline Brandeis’s success and expertise in film production (“Finds Ready Market for Her Cinema Features” or “Writes Own Continuity and Attends to Details”), a 1926 Los Angeles Times article titled “Woman Makes Films for Fun,” depicts Madeline Brandeis as a wealthy hobbyist: “Will the producing of motion pictures ever become the plaything—the pastime—of the rich? This question recurred mentally again and again in the course of a conversation with Madeline Brandeis in the delightful patio of her hillside home in Hollywood.” Brandeis herself appears to be complicit with the portrayal of her work as an activity she undertakes primarily for its personal satisfactions. She is quoted saying: “‘In a sense, this picture-making is only a pastime. Perhaps I shouldn’t say just that—it was a pastime in the beginning, but the success I have had and the financial returns have been so gratifying that I know I shall make pictures from time to time as long as I live. It is fascinating and keeps one occupied’” (“Woman Makes Films” C30)

What are we, as film historians, to make of a woman who describes her work in cinema as a “pastime,” as something to be indulged in “from time to time”; who was, in addition, personally wealthy enough not to have to call any undertaking “work”; and who primarily made films for a child audience? The tension between Brandeis’s significant accomplishments during the course of her career, and the ways in which her career was portrayed (both by herself and the print media), puts into question several binaries that the field frequently relies on to evaluate filmmakers and films: professional versus amateur, full-time versus part-time, entertainment versus educational, and films for general audiences versus those aimed primarily at children.

Brandeis was born Madeline Frank on December 18, 1897. She attended the elite Miss Burke’s School in San Francisco, and in 1918, at the age of twenty-one, married millionaire department store owner E. John Brandeis (Who Was Whom? 1976, 198). She moved with him to Omaha, Nebraska, and the couple had one child, a daughter, Marie Madeline. They were divorced on April 25, 1921, just three years after their marriage. Brandeis was granted $400,000 in lieu of alimony, as well as sole custody of Marie Madeline (“Gets Divorce” 15). She died in 1937, at the age of 39, as a result of injuries sustained in a car accident that occurred while she and Marie were driving to Hollywood from New York.

Madeline Brandeis, dust jacket of novel, Adventure in Hollywood. Private Collection.

