“Mr. Osbourn took me to the deathhouse at the New York State penitentiary in order that I might secure better local color for my film drama, Who Shall Take My Life?” writer Maibelle Heikes is quoted in the Atlanta Constitution, explaining her research process for the 1917 film. She entered Sing Sing prison with an order from the New York Supreme Court of New York (D4). Written by Justice and directed by Colin Campbell, Who Shall Take My Life? (1917) tells the story of Big Bill O’Shaughnessy, a man convicted and executed for the murder of a woman who, after his execution, is discovered to be still alive. Although at times described as anti-capital punishment propaganda, the film was also appreciated in the press for its high level of realism and notably sparked intense discussion because of its strong moral and political stance. The Moving Picture World review mentions a screening for members of the Chicago branch of the Anti-Capital Punishment Society of America attended by prominent politician and citizen supporters (1800). Maibelle Heikes Justice was no stranger to the thorny political and emotional questions raised by the US legal system. The Moving Picture World review explained that she was the daughter of prominent Indiana jurist James Monroe Justice and speculated that quite possibly the screenwriter was familiar with many cases of “miscarried” justice, which produced the suffering of the innocent for crimes they never committed. “Miss Heikes Justice,” the writer asserts, is “an ardent opponent of capital punishment” who produces in her photoplay a “most convincing argument in favor of her belief” (1800).

Signed portrait Maibelle Heikes Justice, 1917. Courtesy of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Margaret Herrick Library. 

In 1895, at the age of twenty-four, Justice began her career writing articles and monthly book reviews. An aspiring poet as well as a playwright, “My Sweetheart’s Fan,” published in Current Literature in 1897, locates her in the romantic tradition: “The air was suave with summer / More suasive Dora’s eyes—/ Such eyes that fall to drooping / at first, at love’s surprise” (336). Numerous short stories over the next twenty years eventually led to Justice’s transition from the literary realm into the motion picture world. When she was in her mid-forties, for instance, “The Other Man,” published by Cosmopolitan in 1913, was also produced as a short film. Justice’s output during her early years writing for the cinema is impressive. Between 1913 and 1916 she is credited with writing either titles or scenarios for over thirty short films. She also worked for more than ten different directors at companies including Selig Polyscop, Lubin, Metro, and Essanay (Brownlow 1990, 259).

Justice’s collaboration with the actress, writer, and director Kathlyn Williams is particularly notable as together they made several short motion pictures including The Governor’s Daughter (1913), The Love of Penelope (1913), Mrs. Hilton’s Jewels (1913), and The Leopard’s Foundling (1914). When she later moved into feature film work, Justice continued collaborating on projects with established women in the industry, one example of which is The Glory of Yolanda (1917), written by Justice and based on her play, directed by Marguerite Bertsch in a production starring Anita Stewart.

