By the time Margery Wilson reached her late twenties, she had completed her work as a film director. Prior to that, according to autobiographical accounts, she had received a seminary education supplemented in philosophy and literature by her father, actively pursued social-service work, and given one-woman public performances at clubs, schools, and churches in the Cincinnati area. She toured Ohio and south to Atlanta as a leading lady with the John Lawrence players, founded her own theatre company at sixteen years of age, and embarked to London with her sister Mary on an aborted world tour as musical entertainers (Wilson 1956). Then, in 1914, Margery Wilson traveled to Los Angeles and launched her Hollywood career. Today she is best remembered as Brown Eyes in D. W. Griffith’s Intolerance (1916), but her motion picture career was extensive, with three dozen roles including many starring performances to her credit.

Margery Wilson, Eye of the Night (1916). Private Collection.

In Hollywood, she was under contract to D. W. Griffith, then, as Anthony Slide says, “director-in-chief” at Reliance-Majestic Studios, which would later become the Fine Arts Corporation, (Slide 1998, 171). Working under Griffith (credited as Margie Wilson), she costarred with Dorothy Gish in Bred in the Bone (1915) and with Douglas Fairbanks in Double Trouble (1915). She played the lead (credited as Marjory Wilson) in The Eye of the Night (1916), with John Gilbert as her younger brother, and starred with W. S. Hart in a handful of films including The Return of Draw Egan (1916), Wolf Lowry (1917), and The Gun Fighter (1917), all for the New York Motion Picture Corporation, Kay-Bee. In Venus in the East (1919) for Famous Players-Lasky Corporation, Wilson was directed by Donald Crisp and she appeared (credited as Marjorie Wilson) with J. Warren Kerrigan in The House of Whispers (1920) for Robert Brunton Productions. Wilson was thus an experienced motion picture actress before she began writing, directing, and producing her own projects.

Magery Wilson portrait. Courtesy of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Margaret Herrick Library. 

