Alice Smythe Jay was a cinema organist, conductor, composer, and inventor. She spent much of her career in Hawaii and the West Coast. Over the course of her career, Jay composed music for accompanying film and for the concert hall; conducted orchestras and ensembles in concert; became a well-known commentator on music for the cinema; made recordings to use in accompanying film; and patented her own recording process and ran her own production company using it.

In 1915, Jay, already an established cinema organist, became well-known nationally when she began corresponding with Ernst Luz, the editor of the “Music and the Picture” column in Motion Picture News. Discoursing on what music to use and what to avoid in cinema accompaniment, how to prepare a compiled score (a score made up of pre-existing pieces), and how to improvise, Jay’s letters, which Luz published frequently, offered erudite and practical advice and commentary on the creation and performance of music for film. It was essential, Jay wrote, that cinema musicians have a comprehensive knowledge of Western art music as well as current popular songs. She insisted that study—both of long-existing classics and of new music—was indispensable for compiling a successful score, and noted that her own sources were the Western European canon of art music; well-established vernacular songs; and new music, both that written for the screen and published as photoplay music and new popular songs (Burton 1915, 191).

An orchestrion, an automated instrument designed to replicate the sounds of an orchestra in a moving picture theater. Private Collection.

Jay’s desire for good motion picture music, along with her frequent frustrations with poor accompaniments, led her to begin making recordings of her scores for the many and varied automated instruments that were becoming popular in the cinema, such as the player-piano-like Bartola and orchestrion. Believing that recorded accompaniments would bring about a time “when music will fit into each and every picture the same as opera music to a libretto” (Jay 1919, 2346), Jay wanted to produce her recordings for all makes and models of instrument. Finding that many recording companies were limited to a specific format of recording, she filed plans to construct a $12,000 factory in Los Gatos, California for “the manufacture of music rolls” in February 1916 (“New and Enlarged Shops” 78). She began marketing the rolls that same year in the major trade journals, advertising that her “hand-played inspiration music rolls for motion pictures” were, when appropriately used, a complete replacement for a live orchestra (Jay 1916, 1670). Jay also made short rolls that could be used for specific kinds of scenes and combined to create a compiled soundtrack of rolls, according to a March 1916 Smythe Jay Music Company advertisement in Motion Picture News (1365). Her piece “The Storm at Sea,” one of her only known extant works, was composed for one of these rolls.

