Marian Blackton worked on over fifteen films during her short career as a scenarist and occasional actress. Her father, J. Stuart Blackton, one of the founders of the Vitagraph Company, directed all but two of her scenarios. Marian Blackton became her father’s script girl in 1921, and graduated to scenario writer in 1924. Most of her scenarios were dramas adapted from existing novels or plays.

Marian Constance Blackton with her father, J. Stuart Blackton. Courtesy of the Library of Congress. 

Blackton was the daughter of Isabelle MacArthur, the first of her father’s four wives. She grew up at the Vitagraph Company Studios, and thus her first appearance on screen seemed inevitable. She was watching the filming of her father’s The Life of Moses (1910), when she was spotted and sent to the costume department because they needed more extras. Blackton followed her father on location, later recalling in the biography she wrote of her father that “Location trips with my father’s company were my idea of heaven” (89). After graduating from high school, she asked to join her father, who was then working in England. As Anthony Slide explains, J. Stuart Blackton had left Vitagraph in 1917 to start his own independent company and by then Blackton Productions had a studio in London. He refused, but she went anyway, threatening, “You let me come over to England and learn the scenario business right now or I’ll join a burlesque show” (1987, 110).

Marian Blackton became J. Stuart Blackton’s script girl on The Gypsy Cavalier/A Gipsy Cavalier (1922) and also appeared as an extra, then did the same for The Virgin Queen (1923). Her first full scenario, according to the Blackton biography, was Between Friends (1924). J. Stuart Blackton was displeased with the original script, so Marian wrote her own, and she proudly recalls her father saying that it was the first script he had ever read that didn’t require a single change (52). By 1925 it was the news in the Los Angeles Times that she was adapting and writing all J. Stuart Blackton’s scenarios, and the paper praised the script for Behold This Woman (1924) for its “strength and delicacy of touch.” The same article, in addition to raving that she brought credit to the “name of Blackton” in only three years, compares her with established writers Jeanie Macpherson and June Mathis (28). Blackton adapted and wrote several more films that her father directed, including the very successful The Clean Heart (1924), as well as The Beloved Brute (1924), The Redeeming Sin (1925), Tides of Passion (1925), and The Happy Warrior (1925).

