The existence of a figure like Marion E. Wong challenges the received narrative of American film industry history in which Anglo-American men started the majority of the first companies and the participation of Asians was limited to providing exoticism on screen as actors or extras. If we were to look to the New York Times as a definitive source, we might conclude that only one Chinese-American company existed in the silent era and that that company was started in 1922 by James B. Leong. According to the Times, Leong financed the Wah Ming Motion Picture Company in order to produce “picture-plays of, by, and for the Chinese” (69). However, five years before and with the same goal in mind, a young Chinese-American woman had started the Mandarin Film Company in Oakland, California. We know now that she was not only president of the company, but also screenwriter, director, and costume designer. Until recently, however, the name Marion E. Wong was known to scholars only from a small note in the back pages of a 1917 issue of the Moving Picture World. The article mentions the Mandarin Film Company and heralds their first multiple-reel feature film, The Curse of the Quon Gwon: When the Far East Mingles with West (1916), as the first and only film made by an all-Chinese cast and an all-Chinese company (63).

The achievements of Marion E. Wong were unusual enough to attract the attention of several local newspapers, most notably the Oakland Tribune. In the first of two articles, Wong reveals that she is determined to introduce to the world Chinese motion pictures with “some of the customs and manners of China” (1916). Sounding confident about her venture, she is quoted as saying that if the first picture was successful, her company would continue “exclusive productions.” The next year, in 1917, the Oakland Tribune describes Marion E. Wong as “energy personified,” a Chinese girl with “imagination, executive ability, wit and beauty.” According to the same article, Wong constructed a temporary studio at the rear of her home and rented camera equipment from a “special picture concern in Oakland.”After much negotiation with a businessman in Oakland’s Chinatown and with the support of her elder sister, whose husband was a rich merchant, Wong financed her Oakland-based company with the goal of producing Chinese-themed films. When interviewed, Wong always expressed enthusiasm for presenting Chinese culture to Westerners.

Violet Wong and Marion E. Wong. Private Collection.

In a recent interview, the descendants of Marion E. Wong confirmed that she was the producer-director as well as the screenwriter of The Curse. She also cast herself as the villainess. In addition, in order to avoid extra expenses, Wong cast her family members (her sister-in-law Violet June Wong, her mother Chin See, and her niece Stella). While the company was based in Oakland and most of the film was shot in Niles Valley, California, the Moving Picture World reported that part of the film was shot in Southern China and mentions Wong’s trip to China to make arrangements for the release of the film (63).

