Mrs. M. T. Pender was a prolific Ulster fiction writer and outspoken nationalist whose serialized novel, O’Neill of the Glen (1891), was the source for the Film Company of Ireland’s (FCOI) first indigenous Irish feature, O’Neil of the Glen (1916). The FCOI was incorporated in March 1916 with the goal of producing Irish films with Irish themes and an all-Irish cast and crew, according to “Irish Film Production” (1916, 6). The Irish Limelight reports in “What the Irish Film Co. is Doing,” however, that never-released work was destroyed in the Dame Street office fires during the Easter Rising in April: “… the first three months work was wiped out in a week” (1917, 3). The FCOI immediately resumed production and O’Neil of the Glen was released to censors and the press in June, exhibitors in July, and the public in August. It is widely regarded, then, as the company’s first production. Founded and managed by Jim Sullivan and Ellen O’Mara Sullivan, the FCOI went on to produce highly nationalist films until 1920 when O’Mara Sullivan died. Pender’s writing, which promoted Irish culture and advocated a free and united Ireland, appealed to the company’s nationalist leanings.

Mrs. M.T. Pender. Private Collection.

Pender’s literary upbringing and the political turmoil of the period shaped her writing. She was born on a small farm in Killead, County Antrim, Ulster province, in what is now Northern Ireland. Alexander Millar, descended from Pender’s maternal line, notes in “Discovering Mrs. Pender,” that her father was a poor Roman Catholic farmer, while her mother came from a landed Presbyterian family that disowned her when she married (49-50). Pender was raised as an Irish Catholic patriot in a literary household and went on to train as a school teacher (50). During her lifetime, Ireland was plagued by land disputes and early struggles for independence from Britain, both of which became the subject of her poetry, non-fiction, and fiction. “The Irish at Gallipoli,” like her other poetry, celebrates Irish nationalism, in this case the country’s contribution to international struggles (1916, 2). The non-fiction essay, “Some Men and Episodes of ’98,” honors early Irish rebels and advocates for a united Ireland (1897, 123-26). She also lectured on these subjects, particularly for the Belfast branch of the Nationalist Association of Irish Women, later the Irish Women’s Centenary Union (Urquhart 91-92). Pender’s fiction is equally nationalistic, portraying British antagonists, Irish victims of colonial rule, and Ulster resistance. One of her more well-known novels, The Green Cockade: A Tale of Ulster in Ninety Eight (1898), tells the story of the Battle of Antrim during the Irish Rebellion of 1798 from the rebel’s point of view. In addition to her novels, she frequently contributed fiction to both newspapers and “story papers” (illustrated literary periodicals). Her fiction appeared regularly in the Irish Independent, Dundalk Democrat, Leinster Leader, and Shamrock. The latter featured the first installment of O’Neill of the Glen on page 1 of the August 1, 1891 edition. The serial ran for 24 weeks until December 12, 1891.

Pender, then, had already made a name for herself as a poet, fiction writer, and political spokeswoman, when W. T. Lysaght adapted her novel for the FCOI production. The film opened at the Bohemian Picture Theatre in Dublin on August 7, 1916. An advertisement in the Irish Times enticed Dubliners by informing them that a camera man would be taking moving pictures of the audience to be later shown on the screen: “Don’t miss this chance of seeing what you look like on the Screen” (4). Unfortunately, there are no surviving prints, but reviews and announcements suggest it stayed close to the original Shamrock serial. (“O’Neil” and “O’Neill” are both used in advertisements and press coverage for the film.) The column “Stage and Gallery” in the Dublin Evening Mail notes the film is set in Ulster and tells the story of a romance between Don O’Neil, the son of a landowner, and Nola, the daughter of a solicitor who swindles and murders Don’s father (5). Nola is tormented by a suitor, Graves, who threatens to release this information, but is eventually subdued by Don. The film’s nationalism centers on the O’Neils, proud Irish landowners, whose property is threatened by “outsiders”–a thinly veiled reference to the Land Wars in the second half of the 19th century. The Film Company of Ireland regularly explored this conflict between the Irish (both tenants and landowners) and often absentee British landowners.

