Ellen Maud O’Shea was born on October 29, 1882, in Soho, London. Both her parents were Irish. They had five daughters, and each sister had a stage name: Sarah Emily was known as Eily Adair, Alice Mary as Norah, Julia Blanche as Monie Mine, Ellen Maud as Nell, and Constance Gladys as Connie.

Eily and Norah, the two eldest sisters, had a specialty act that was a version of the Alexandre Dumas classic The Corsican Brothers. Their mother worked as manager for “The Sisters O’Shea, Irish Duettists and Comedy Dancers.” Ernest De Vere, the manager of the Cambridge music hall, finally changed their name to “The Emerald Sisters,” and they became regulars on the Moss and Stoll Theatre circuits and toured abroad. All the sisters, apart from the youngest, Connie, took turns in the act.

When she was twenty-eight, Nell married David George Beattie, also known as Charles Beattie, on August 9, 1910.  This brought a change to her career. At Charles’s request she stopped performing in variety and music hall shows. It was around this period that Nell entered the film industry both as actress and producer, working throughout most of the 1910s  in various film companies located at Brighton and Shoreham on the south coast of England. One of these companies, the Brightonia Film Company, was registered on May 7, 1913, with a capital of £1,000 and a film factory at Hampton Street in Brighton. The two company directors listed were W. H. Speer, managing director, and Mrs. N. Beattie, indicating that Nell was also known professionally by her married surname.

W. Harold Speer had been involved in the variety business for some years. In January 1901, his cinematograph and variety combination had appeared at Pirbright Hall, Woking. In March of the same year, he showed Aladdin on the Ventiscope at the Royal in Ryde on the Isle of Wight. He later became proprietor of the Queen’s Theatre in Brighton, and on October 5, 1911, he launched Biocolour Films, a system invented by William Friese-Greene, which led to litigation over a number of years with the rival color company of Charles Urban and G. A. Smith with their Kinemacolor. Speer also founded Brighton and County Film Company, producing two fiction films released in May 1912: A Nurse’s Devotion  and The Motor Bandits. In addition he had a distribution company, the Popular Film Company, at 20 Cecil Court, Charing Cross Road, London.

