Ruth Bryan Owen was an orator, a US Democratic congresswoman (1929–1933), and a minister to Denmark and Iceland from 1933 to 1936. She was the daughter of the “Great Commoner” William Jennings Bryan, a three-time Democratic presidential nominee who retired to Florida in the late 1910s. She was married three times, first to Chicago artist William Homer Leavitt, in 1903, then to retired major Reginald Altham Owen, and lastly to the Danish captain Borge Rohde in 1936 (Vickers 59). Between 1919 and 1922, however, she devoted almost all of her energies to filmmaking in Miami, Florida, declaring in a letter dated July 22, 1921, to her friend Carrie Dunlap that she loved nothing as she loved the cinema, and she had finally found her true “métier.” She independently financed, produced, wrote, and directed the feature film Once Upon a Time/Scheherazade (1922), which is now considered lost. 

Ruth Bryan Owen,  1929. Courtesy of the Library of Congress. 

Born in 1885 in Jacksonville, Illinois, Owen grew up in a household immersed in intellectual conversation and political discourse. Inspired by her attorney mother, she worked diligently on her father’s presidential campaign and wrote much of his political correspondence (Springen 11-12, 14). During World War I, she served as a voluntary nurse in the Egypt-Palestine conflict, where she met and married Major Owen. The couple relocated to her parents’ home, Villa Serena, in Miami, where Owen’s life consisted of nursing her invalid husband back to health and caring for her four children. She was a leader in the Parent Teachers Association, the Theater Guild, and the National Consumers League, and served as president of the Miami Women’s Club, speaking on a national tour circuit (Letter from Owen to Dunlap dated June 13, 1921).

In the spring of 1921, she embarked on Once Upon a Time. Conceived as an introduction to Arabian Nights and set in India, the motion picture drama involves a shah who is dethroned by his chief counselor, a sadist who uses his power to torture young women. Owen’s film opens, according to the 1922 Moving Picture World review, with the overthrow of the Middle Eastern Shah Zaman, King of Sassan, by a sadistic invader—the second Shah Wazir. The usurper begins sentencing fair maidens to be thrown to the hungry crocodiles, until the climactic moment when he discovers “the most beautiful one of all,” Scheherazade (207). Her life hangs in the balance. A detailed description in the Miami Metropolis explains that, in the finale, the original shah, who has been presumed dead, returns just in time to save the heroine and take his rightful seat of power. During a Miami screening, “the audience gave a sigh of relief when the Wazir finally killed himself…and harmony in the kingdom was restored.” The shah, believed dead, returns just in time to save the heroine from his nemesis.

