Sarah Yeiser Mason shared an Academy Award with her husband Victor Heerman for the 1933 screenplay for Little Women. It is startling, in light of this achievement, to see how little information on Mason is available for researchers today. She seems to have left no papers, and most of the existing manuscripts and correspondence belonging to her are among Heerman’s papers in the Margaret Herrick Library of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

Sarah Y. Mason and Zasu Pitts. 

Born in Pima, Arizona, Sarah Y. Mason began work in films in 1918 when she joined the company of a location shoot for the Douglas Fairbanks film Arizona. In the first years of her career in Hollywood, Mason wrote short comedies for notable figures such as Fatty Arbuckle, Louise Fadenza, and especially ZaSu Pitts, with whom she became very close. In 1920, she was hired by Owen Moore to work with director Heerman on the scenario for The Poor Simp, and they married that same year.

Like many married screenwriters who collaborated with their spouses, the historical record of Mason’s work during this period of her life has been to some degree subsumed under her husband’s. It is therefore difficult at this stage to separate one author from the other, as it is with Mrs. George Randolph Chester and her husband, for instance. But the difference in the couples is important since while the Chesters were always employed as a team and received double credit, Mason appears to have been eclipsed by her husband. Locating her contribution is a problem compounded by the fact that an unpublished interview with Heerman conducted by Anthony Slide in the 1970s is one of the only extended examinations of Mason’s work available. In this interview, Heerman further obscures Mason’s authorship by taking credit for the creative work even on motion pictures where he is not credited alongside his wife. Says Heerman of a trip he took: “Well I went to Cleveland, and my wife was with me, because she was going to Europe. When I left, she wouldn’t work, she couldn’t work, because I mean I practically laid out everything while she was at MGM—she was at MGM a couple or three years” (48).

