From a poverty stricken immigrant to one of Hollywood’s highest paid screenwriters, Levien’s life exemplifies the opportunities available to some women during the silent era of filmmaking. Born Sonya Opesken in 1888 in Panimunik, a small Jewish village within the Russian Empire, she emigrated with her family to the Lower East Side of New York, where her father had taken the name of Levien. Sonya grew up in a politically leftist household, which informed her early life, but which seems to have had little lasting influence on her screenwriting. However, the experience of poverty never totally left her; she wrote in an article published in 1918 in the Metropolitan: “A feather-duster factory swallowed up my teens at four dollars a week… If I would live I must escape from the East Side. If my body did not die, my mind and spirit would” (8).

According to her biographer, Levien dropped out of high school to help support the family. However, later, in 1906, she attended New York University Law School, graduating in 1909. Realizing that law was not her métier (she claimed she would not make a good lawyer because she was too sympathetic and her emotions were too near the surface), she held several secretarial jobs, especially in the magazine publishing business and then began to write her own stories. This period, the early teens, was especially open to young professional women with talent. In 1917 she married Carl Hovey, the son of a Bostonian first family, who was coeditor of the Metropolitan, a magazine for which Levien wrote many stories and articles. They produced two children (Ceplair 55–56).

During the early teens, Levien’s writings reflect her support of the Women’s Suffrage Movement and other liberal causes. At the same time she wrote melodramatic stories about immigrant families. One story, “Baby Doll,” was purchased by Famous Players-Lasky and was made into the feature motion picture The Top of New York (1922). Prior to this, Levien, working as a freelance writer, receiving story credit for three films including Cheated Love (1921)—a remake of The Heart of a Jewess (1913)—produced by Universal Film Manufacturing Company. The story expresses the strength of the immigrant woman.

Sonya Levien portrait. Courtesy of the New York Public Library. 

