Stella F. Simon and Miklos Bandy’s 1927–28 16mm film, Hands: The Life and Love of a Gentle Sex, is a short, experimental, feminist film whose aesthetic is drawn from American and European modernist photography movements and early avant-garde film traditions. The film’s underlying melodramatic narrative formula is complicated by the use of hands as both protagonists and as the central aspect of its modernist mise-en-scène. However, as with so many of the women who collaborated with men in the silent era, official credit did not go to Simon but to Bandy. The titles on all of the extant film prints credit Bandy as the film’s director, but attribute the idea to Simon. When it published four frame enlargements from the film, the British art film journal Close-Up equally attributed the film to him “after an idea by Stella F. Simon.” However, a review published the following month praised “Miss Simon’s” experiment with abstract, constructivist “scenery” (Blakeston 137). This August 1929 article, therefore, becomes the first source in new research that supports Simon as the film’s principle director (Richter 1971, 44; Barr 21; Horak 1995, 43-44; Wild 93-105). Little is known about Bandy, who was the author of one of the first articles in France to discuss Swedish abstract experimentalist Viking Eggeling’s short film Symphonie Diagonale (1924) in Germaine Dulac’s journal, Schémas. Modernist composer Marc Blitzstein wrote and performed the film’s original four-hand mechanical piano score and made a composite recording of it in March 1936 at the behest of RCA and the Museum of Modern Art (Lehrman 35).

Still from Hände/Hands (Miklos Bandy & Stella Simon 1927-28). Private Collection.

Stella Simon, née Furchgott, was born in Charleston, South Carolina, and grew up in Denver, Colorado, where she worked as a darkroom assistant after high school. In 1900, she married Adolphe Simon, with whom she made a home and reared three children in Salt Lake City, Utah. Upon his death in 1917, Simon moved her three boys to San Francisco, where she met the Photo-Secession photographer Anne Brigman, who played an influential role in Simon’s decision to move to New York City to pursue formal photographic training at the Clarence H. White School of Photography between 1923 and 1925. A founding member of Photo-Secession (1902) with Alfred Stieglitz, White was a renowned teacher of photography who developed, following the philosophy of John Dewey, the “project method” that used technical problems and pictorial limitations to instruct his students. Other notable students of White—though not necessarily enrolled at the same time as Simon—include Laura Gilpin, Paul B. Haviland, Dorothea Lange, and Ralph Steiner (a student between 1921 and 1922).

Clarence White’s students, including Simon and the young gallerist Julien Levy, who was a friend of Simon’s son, accompanied White on a study trip to Mexico in 1925. By this time, Simon was the president of the White School Alumni Association and had also developed an interest in filmmaking. In the fall of 1926, Simon enrolled in filmmaking classes at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin, where she also encountered the modernist photographic movements associated with the Bauhaus School and the New Objectivity movement. While in Berlin, at a UFA screening of German experimentalist Hans Richter’s films, Simon introduced herself to the artist and discussed her own filmmaking project with him. Richter later indicated that he may have contributed footage to Simon’s film (Richter 44).

