Pearl Ing as a young girl. Private Collection.

Pearl Ing, or Yin Mingzhu, was the first woman to play the leading role in a film made in Shanghai—the earliest center of Chinese filmmaking. Ing’s original name was Shangxian. Like most children born into upper-middle class families, she also had another name, Longguan. Later, she adopted the name “Pearl” in English, or “Mingzhu” in Chinese (J. Chen 59). Her father died when she was a child, but left her and her mother a lottery ticket that won the grand prize. This windfall allowed Pearl’s mother to move the family to Shanghai, where she went to the prestigious McTyeire School for Girls. As a top student there, Ing learned new ideas and manners. She was good at dancing, swimming, singing, bicycling, driving, and horseback riding (Zheng 15). She adopted her early fashion style from American serial queen Pearl White (Song n.p.), who became very popular in China for films where she played the detective role of “Pearl” and adventurous young women like Pauline in The Perils of Pauline (1914) and Elaine in The New Exploits of Elaine (1915) (J. Chen 59). Ing ordered custom-made clothes and shoes that she designed herself, and these items were often displayed in the windows of tailors and shoemakers as the newest fashion (Zheng 15). Nicknamed “Miss F.F.” (Foreign Fashion), she was already a star in Shanghai’s social circles at seventeen. Ing and her two schoolmates—Fu Wenhao (“Miss A.A.” or Ace Ace) and Yuan Danru (“Miss S.S.” or Shanghai Style)—formed a trio of Shanghai flappers, and were often invited to high-class parties in Shanghai (J. Chen 60).

Pearl Ing, Some Girl/重返故鄉 (1925). Private Collection.

Ing was a young woman with a progressive mind. She was known for persuading girls from conservative families to unbind their feet. At a party, seventeen-year-old Pearl met a young artist who was already famous for painting calendars with beautiful women dressed in modern fashion: Dan Duyu. He had obtained a camera and was about to make his first film. Both Ing and Dan loved Pearl White, and Ing accepted his invitation to be his leading lady (J. Chen 60). In a press article, Ing stated that she was touched by Dan’s determination to make Chinese films about real Chinese life, in order to counter portrayals of the Chinese as thieves and barbarians in Western films. In order to join his cause, Ing decided to “sacrifice herself” (Yin n.p.), suggesting that the idea of women on screen was still seen by many as improper or degrading for middle or upper class women.

