When Thea (Terezie) Červenková left Czechoslovakia in 1923 to start a new life with her brother in Latin America, her passport stated that she was a writer and a journalist. However, she was more than that. At the age of forty-one she was leaving behind at least two careers—one in writing and a shorter, but no less prolific career in the film industry, where she worked as a director, a screenwriter, a journalist, and, most importantly, as an entrepreneur. During a five-year period, from 1918 to 1923, she translated continuity titles, wrote eight scripts, directed eight films, wrote articles for the trade film magazine Československý film, and cofounded, with cameraman Josef Brabec, her own film company, Filmový ústav, which she ran until her departure for Rio de Janeiro in 1923. We learn this from an undated interview with her closest coworker, Josef Brabec (Josefem Brabcem), who also recalls her as a woman with a “business spirit,” who managed a guesthouse in Prague (Brabcem 3).

Paličova dcera (1923). Courtesy of the Národní filmový archiv.

Before she departed for Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Červenková had worked in the fledgling Czechoslovak film industry on several levels from 1918 to 1923. She started in 1918 as a continuity intertitle translator, presumably for the film company Slavia. In this five-year period, Červenková supervised production and was writer-director on eight motion pictures. Four of these were produced by her own company Filmový ústav. Červenková also published numerous articles in the pioneering Czechoslovak film magazine Československý film.

When one looks back at Červenková’s activities in the highly disorganized and unstable environment of the early Czechoslovak film industry at the end of the 1910s and early 1920s, boldness and drive typify her character. The interview with Josef Brabec confirms this as he describes her as a highly intelligent, independent, and capable woman (Brabcem 3). Červenková’s work and film career have been so far documented very little, but in the existing accounts of Czechoslovak film history by Czech film historian Zdeněk Štábla, it has been reduced to several short remarks that focused on the highlights of her latter career. In the Czech film history, she has become widely known as the “lady crazy about film,” but the nickname obscured her far more complex involvement in the industry. Červenková’s personal and professional life beyond the motion picture business has been neglected entirely, as has her life before she started to pursue her film career.

