Named after the Valkyrie of Wagnerian lore, the martial warrior maiden who led warriors into battle, Valda Valkyrien herself emerges from the Hollywood press glowing with a mythical aura. Distinguishing between the real Valkyrien and Valkyrien the Hollywood myth is key to a profile of the star.

Valda Valkyrien portrait. Courtesy of the Wisconsin Center for Film and Television.

Repeated coverage portrays a talented actress and star dancer, even prima ballerina, of the Royal Danish Ballet, whose beauty so dazzled King Frederik VIII of Denmark in a nationwide beauty pageant in 1914 that he bestowed upon her the title of “Valkyrien—Year of 1914 A.D.—The Most Beautiful Woman of her Race!” (29) thereby making her “the toast of every café, club and home in Copenhagen,” as reported in the Moving Picture World (1246). The same issue reports that when Centaur Film Company producer David Horsley visited Denmark in the summer of 1913, he was so impressed by the Danish diva’s on-screen work that he made her an offer to star in his upcoming feature, an offer that she reportedly refused, for she had left the film world upon her recent marriage to Baron Hrolf von Dewitz, a naval officer and, according to Moving Picture World, an “expert of the first calibre in the finer points of photoplay construction” (624). Gathering war clouds in Europe obliged Valkyrien and Dewitz to relocate to the United States in 1914. While the Baron found himself consumed by his work as a military expert for the New York Daily, Baroness Dewitz was left languishing “alone in a strange land,” whereupon she reportedly resolved to return to motion pictures in order to stave off homesickness, and accepted Horsley’s offer (1246).

In a recent article, “The Strange Case of Valda Valkyrien,” Hans J. Wollstein gives a contradictory picture of Valkyrien’s background and pre-Hollywood film career. Born in Reykjavik, Iceland (and not Copenhagen), Adele Frede, later known as Valkyrien, may have been a student at the Royal Danish Ballet, but was neither a prima ballerina nor premiere danseuse, as she later claimed. A bit part player in at least four of Danish film industry giant Nordisk’s films in 1912, including The New Shoeshine Boy (1912) and The Story of Mother (1912), Adele Frede featured prominently as the hotel owner’s flirtatious daughter in the first film and as a domestic in the second, but was by no means a star in the flourishing Danish film industry.

