Theatrical actress Vera McCord wrote, produced, and directed her one and only independent feature motion picture, the semi-scandalous The Good-Bad Wife, in 1921. She had had a relatively short theatrical career between 1912 and 1914 in Oakland, California, after a seven-year stint on the stage in London before her one producing gamble. What else we know of McCord’s life is that she was born in 1872 in Marshalltown, Iowa. The daughter of the town’s deputy sheriff, she, her parents, and her two brothers eventually moved to central California, where her father took up real estate. As a young woman, she enrolled at Snell’s Women’s Seminary in Berkeley, and later took a single course at Emerson College in Boston. It was on a trip to England and Paris “under the chaperonage of [one] Lady Lewds,” according to an Oakland Tribune article in 1914, that she developed her theatrical skills (28).

During the years in Oakland, McCord appeared in her only known film. She starred opposite Gilbert M. “Broncho Billy” Anderson in the one-reel Broncho Billy’s Mistake (1913), an installment in the long-running set of Broncho Billy serials. Like many of these Essanay West Coast productions, it was shot in Niles, California, twenty-five miles south of Oakland. While McCord’s movements in the mid-to-late-1910s remain vague, she reveals potentially crucial information about why she made the move back to California from New York in 1912 in what was most likely a self-written “press release” published in the Oakland Tribune. The article, “Is Oakland Girl to Appear Here?” states that “she was playing with Henry Miller when her father became ill and it was necessary for her to cancel her engagements” (28). The 1920 US Federal Census tells us that she had returned to Manhattan with her widowed mother, her widower brother, and his young son, listing herself as single actress.

Piecing together information about McCord is complicated by the fact that her theatre-driven career resulted in a nomadic existence, but also, like so many actresses, she practiced the deceptive art of self-invention. For example, although McCord lists herself in the 1920 US Federal Census as thirty-five years old, which would mean she was born in 1885, the 1880 census lists her birth year as 1872. Doing the calculation, we realize that at the time she made The Good-Bad Wife, she was a fifty-year-old woman portraying herself as thirty-seven.

Vera McCord, 1911.

