Known for being one of the youngest scenario editors, male or female, during the silent era, Winifred Dunn, like Anita Loos, started writing at a young age. As a girl in Chicago, Dunn discovered her skills as a writer as well as a translator when at the age of eighteen she translated a German play into English and altered the production to fit an American stage. While still in her teens, Dunn began writing two-reel film plays for Selig Polyscope in New York, where her first original feature Too Late (1914) was produced (II16).

Winifred Dunn portrait. Courtesy of the Museum of the Moving Image. 

“The Truth About the Movies,” Dorothy Farnum, Winifred Dunn, Florence Lawrence, Olga Printzlau, Ethel Chaffin, and Rosemary Cooper. Private Collection.

In late 1921 or early 1922, Dunn moved to Hollywood, where she led Sawyer-Lubin Productions for Metro Pictures. During this time, she assisted in editing and titling Quincy Adams Sawyer (1922) and wrote the screen version of Willard Mack’s play “Your Friend and Mine” (1923). Then, on February 10, 1923, at the age of 24, Dunn began her duties as scenario editor at Metro Pictures, which by 1924 would be Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios (B12). Dunn quickly became regarded as one of the busiest scenario editors in Hollywood, where she advocated for writers’ perfecting their craft by the reading of newspapers in order to “keep a metaphorical finger on the pulse of life everywhere” (B36). In 1925, Dunn’s success was taken to new heights when Mary Pickford asked her to handle her future stories (A11). In 1926, Sparrows, the first collaboration between Dunn and Pickford, opened to great acclaim, hailed as Pickford’s “greatest picture” and “a remarkable triumph” (H4). But some controversy arose in June 1927 when Pickford and Dunn were sued for $100,000 by the estate of Harry Hyde for copyright infringement, Hyde claiming that Sparrows was based upon his scenario for The Cry of the Children (3). After the tremendous success of Sparrows, Dunn signed a long-term contract in November 1926 to write scenarios for First National Pictures (A8), the first of which, a prizefighting film entitled The Patent Leather Kid (1927), was noted for its virility, as newspapers asked, “How could a woman know so accurately how bloody noses were made?” (C16). After The Patent Leather Kid, Dunn terminated her contract with First National in order to become the chairman of the woman’s executive committee of the Southern California Olympic Games, which were to be held in Los Angeles in 1933 (C13). Meanwhile, Dunn continued to work as a freelance writer in the late 1920s for studios such as Metro, for The Drop Kick in 1927; and Columbia Pictures, for the early Frank Capra melodrama Submarine in 1928.

