Kinuyo Tanaka was, and still is, one of the most celebrated stars in the history of Japanese cinema. She dedicated her whole life to cinema, acting in over 250 films and collaborating with the most important directors. In the post-war period, Tanaka herself became a film director, the second woman in Japan after wartime filmmaker Tazuko Sakane. Between 1953 and 1962, Tanaka directed six feature films working within the mainstream cinema produced by the Japanese studio system. She was the only female director active during the post-war Golden Age of Japanese cinema in the late 1950s. Her outstanding career in front of and behind the camera not only accompanies the history and technical transformations of cinema in Japan, from the silent era until the late 1970s. It also embodies the socio-political and cultural changes of Japanese society and its female members, offering a unique opportunity to examine the intersections between women’s authorship, representation, and gender discourses in modern Japan.

Born in Shimonoseki, in the southwest of Japan, Tanaka entered the film world in 1924. She was 14 years old and was hired as an actress by Shōchiku studios, one of the major film companies in pre-war Japan, which specialized in modern genre films [gendai geki], and particularly in woman’s films [josei eiga]. In the 1930s, she became one of the most representative stars of the studio, participating in the first successful Japanese talkie, The Neighbor’s Wife and Mine (1931), and gaining audience favor through her roles in romantic melodramas such as The Dancing Girl of Izu (1933), Okoto to Sasuke (1935), and The Love-Troth Tree (1938-39). Her popularity and success were such that Tanaka’s name was even used in film titles to attract the public, for example, in The Story of Kinuyo (1930), Kinuyo the Lady Doctor (1937), and Kinuyo’s First Love (1940).

Kinuyo Tanaka in Jinsei no onimotsu (1935). Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons. 

Tanaka worked exclusively for Shōchiku until 1950 when she became a freelance actress. Her years at Shōchiku overlapped with times of profound transformation in Japan, particularly for women. Tanaka’s characters and star persona bore the traces of those changes, often becoming a site for their production, circulation, and negotiation. For instance, in films such as A Burden of Life (1935), Tanaka played the role of the “modern girl” [moga], a female figure that embodied the national and gender anxieties of Japanese modernity (Wada-Marciano 2008, 76-110). Similarly, during the wartime years (1931-1945), Tanaka participated in propaganda productions such as Pray at Dawn (1940) and Army (1944). In these films, she represented, but sometimes also challenged, the female ideal of “good wife, wise mother” [ryōsai kenbo], which was encouraged by the militarist ideology driving the Japanese nation at the time (Lee 2011). In the aftermath of the Japanese war defeat in 1945, Tanaka also adapted her career to the new post-war order. Following the film policy of the Allied Occupation forces, many films promoted democratic ideas and political reforms, as well as notions of gender equality and women’s rights (all according to American standards at the time). Tanaka contributed to this trend by acting in the so-called “women’s liberation trilogy” directed by Kenji Mizoguchi, which included Victory of Women (1946), The Love of Sumako the Actress (1948), and My Love Has Been Burning (1949). Moreover, after the war, Tanaka also engaged, on and off screen, with the national traumas and gender contradictions that emerged in this turbulent period of Japanese history. Departing from her image as a national sweetheart, she impersonated the problematic post-war figure of the streetwalker prostitute [pan pan] in Women of Night (1947) and was involved in a media scandal after her tour of the United States as cultural ambassador led to her being accused of Americanization.

