Louise Veltée, later called Louise Kolm and then Louise Fleck due to her two marriages, is the first known female film producer, screenplay author, and director in the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. Although several documents on this female film pioneer have been preserved, it is still almost impossible to draw an exact picture of her contributions, especially as her archival papers and estate, located at the Austrian Film Archive, are not publicly accessible and detailed research has so far not been possible. While many of her films from 1919 onward are extant, only a few films from the early 1910s have been preserved, allowing for only a narrow appreciation of the beginning of her career as a screenplay author, producer, and director. As Kolm-Fleck frequently worked with her husbands on film productions, her work can be understood in the context of collaboration, as she was a team member and a partner, as well as an influential comrade-in-arms in the efforts to construct a national film industry at the time of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy.

Louise, the daughter of a pyrotechnist, was born on August 1, 1873 in Vienna, which was at that time the center of a multinational state. Her father founded the Stadtpanoptikum, or City Panopticon, on one of the finest shopping streets of present day Vienna, the Kohlmarkt, where he presented his first so-called “living pictures,” along with numerous curiosities and attractions as early as the autumn of 1896 (Fritz 1981, 21). Starting in 1906, Louise filmed–with her husband Anton Kolm, who owned a photographic studio, and his cameraman Jakob Fleck–her first documentaries of street scenes, military parades, and horse races, as well as the hustle and bustle of the Prater, which was a popular amusement park in Vienna.

Logo for Wiener Kunstfilm GmbH. Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.

In 1910, the team, made up of Louise, Anton, and Jakob, founded the Erste österreichische Kinofilms-Industrie AG, or the First Austrian Cinema Film Industry Corporation, with financial support from Louise’s father. One year later, the company was renamed the Österreichische-ungarische Kinoindustrie, or the Austro-Hungarian Cinema Industry. Due to financial difficulties and differences of opinion between the management, the three-person team soon disbanded the production company (Thaller 2010). In October 1911, they set up a company called Wiener Kunstfilm, or Viennese Art Film, with the goal of producing highbrow entertainment films following the then popular film d’art movement. Along with Saturn, a small company that had been producing erotic films since 1906 for the so-called “Gentlemen’s Evening Film” genre [Herrenabendfilme] and another company in Budapest, Viennese Art Film was the first larger domestic film production company in Austro-Hungary. It was very productive, as Paolo Caneppele emphasizes: “The output of this company was prodigious, especially given the constraints under which is operated; by December 1912, the company had released more than ten films, including dramas, comedies, and documentaries” (2005, 52).

