During the 1910s and 1920s, Aud Egede-Nissen and her sisters Gerd and Ada made a name for themselves in the Nordic and German film industries as actors, producers, and directors. Like many female pioneers in the film industry, their work has been neglected. The contribution of the Egede-Nissen sisters, especially Aud, to silent film in the 1910s is remarkable given the odds they had to overcome as female producers in a male-dominated industry and the lack of tradition and experience in their home country, Norway.

The Egede-Nissen sisters were the daughters of a radical politician. Through her younger sisters, Aud became interested in the theatre and made her stage debut in Trondheim in 1911. Her sister Gerd had her first engagement as a film actor for Nordisk in Denmark in 1912. A year later, Aud joined her in Copenhagen, working for the Dania Biofilm company. Aud went on to Berlin in 1914, working at Kleines Theater auf der Bühne for a short period and appearing in her first German film as an actor in the Literaria production Teddy im Schlafsopha (Bjørn Bjørnson 1914). That same year she acted in at least three other German films, and by 1915 had made herself a name in the German film industry as an actor. In 1915 she appeared in at least sixteen German feature films and was about to become famous as a motion picture star.

Aud Egede-Nissen postcard. Private Collection.

In 1916, Aud met actor and director Georg Alexander. Alexander directed her in Wer wirft den ersten Stein auf Sie? in 1916, and in the same year they married. Together with her husband and sisters, Aud Egede-Nissen established a production company in Berlin. Egede-Nissen-Film Company GmbH produced ten features in 1917, the first of which was the comedy Ich heirate meine Puppe (Georg Alexander 1917) starring Aud in a comic role. Most of the thirty feature films the company produced were divided into three series, each with one of the three sisters as leading actor and star. The Egede-Nissen series, built around Aud, came in two waves, the first in 1917–18 and the second in 1918–19, with a total of eleven features. Some of these were dramatic tragedies, like Die Geburt der Venus (Georg Alexander 1917); others were detective films.

