Among all the pioneers linked to the birth of cinema in Argentina was the young woman of Italian origins who was to become, as far as we know at the moment, not only the first Argentine woman filmmaker, but also the filmmaker of the first Argentine children’s movie and the first woman to found an academy for film actors in South America: Emilia Saleny. Few records are available for us to piece together her life. Her death certificate, found in the Registro Nacional de las Personas (National Register of Persons in Buenos Aires), states that she died on August 22, 1978 at her home, Calle Caseros 574, the widow of Alberto Olivero, and the daughter of Antonio Saleny and Victoria Pieri. Her nephew José Di Leo declared her death. The certificate indicates that she was an Argentine citizen and her birth date appears as June 26, 1894. The scant critical essays that have remembered her name seldom include biographic details, and those that do, offer inconclusive speculations. Theater historian Beatriz Seibel follows Jacobo De Diego’s assumption that Emilia was born in 1891 in Buenos Aires (Seibel 2002, 529); historian Héctor Kohen wonders whether she was born in Italy and arrived in Buenos Aires already as a professional actress (Kohen 1994, 34); and film critic Paraná Sendrós asserts in a newspaper article that her origins were Italian and that the original spelling of her name was “Salegni” (n.p.). Several announcements between 1917 and 1919 in the most important newspaper of the Italian community in Buenos Aires at the time, La Patria degli Italiani (1876-1931), indicate that she was an active member of the Italian community settling in the city at the beginning of the century. On June 23, 1917, la “Signora” Emilia Saleny appears as a “valorosa artista” (“valiant artist”)  in the newspaper’s announcements concerning her film career (“La Niña del bosque” 4).  An announcement in La Patria from October 16, 1917 even suggests that her birthday might have been on October 16, instead of June 26 (4). According to an announcement in La Patria on May 5 of the same year,  her mother, Vittoria, had been a renowned actress in Italy (4). However, Seibel, following the information found in De Diego’s 1973 unpublished Diccionario Teatral (Theater Dictionary/Patrimony of the Fondo Nacional de las Artes), indicates that it was Emilia’s aunt and uncle who were respected Italian actors, and that Emilia would have traveled to Italy in 1910 to train as an actress, working successfully there between 1910 and 1914 in the theater and returning to Buenos Aires in 1914 at the outbreak of World War I (529). On first examination, study of the passenger records of Italian ships entering or exiting the port of Buenos Aires in those years yields no surname that comes close to that of Emilia’s. Neither the spelling “Saleny” (or “Salegni”) is Italian, nor is a name by that spelling listed in genealogical research tools or registered in any Italian ship record—that is, until 1924.


Josefina Emilia Saleny in magazine Caras y Caretas, 1915.

By 1924, when Emilia’s last name appears as “Saleny” on ship records, she had made four films, and perhaps as many as five. Nonetheless, matching the year of birth on Emilia’s death certificate we find a record on the ship Garibaldi arriving on July 29, 1915 in Buenos Aires  from Genoa. It was a ship that offered only 25 first-class bookings out of a total of 1,625. Among the Italian first-class passengers there were two women, both registered as theater actresses: Vittoria Pieri Salani, a fifty-year-old widow; and Emilia Pieri Salani, a twenty-year-old single woman, both listing their nationality as Italian. To judge by at least one other immigration record, her trips to Italy may have been frequent. Almost ten years later, on October 20, 1924, Emilia disembarked in Buenos Aires, having sailed from Genoa on the ship Nazario Sauro, and here on the 1924 voyage where her last name is finally spelled “Saleny” we learn that her profession is still “actress” but her nationality is now Argentine, her age is thirty and her marital status is “widow.”  We can deduce the last name of her first husband from the several announcements about her films in La Patria, where she appears as “Emilia Saleny in Ferrari.” But according to her death certificate, her husband’s last name was Olivero. Thus we are to assume that she was twice a widow.

Saleny belonged to the vibrant Italian community that was rapidly increasing in turn of the century Buenos Aires. The city of Buenos Aires during this period was undoubtedly home to a good number of women dedicated to public culture. However, if they were not involved in the cultural front of the anarchist or feminist movements of the period they tended to be women of high society who, with a few exceptions, educated “decent” señoritas in cultural workshops, teaching the piano or singing classes, or hosted charitable cultural events in ladies clubs. A perusal of the main newspapers – La Nación or La Prensa – or those within the Italian community itself, such as La Patria, shows us that film production, distribution and exhibition were heavily enlisted for charitable purposes.

